CHAPTER 4 (PAGES 114–166)

CHAPTER 4 (PAGES 114–166)
1. The general evidence regarding the facilitative effect of canned
laughter on responses to humor comes from such studies as Smyth and
Fuller (1972), Fuller and Sheehy-Skeffinton (1974), and Nosanchuk and
Lightstone the last of which contains the indication that canned laughter
is most effective for poor material.
2. The researchers who infiltrated the Graham Crusade and who
provided the quote are Altheide and Johnson (1977).
3. See Bandura, Grusec, and Menlove (1967) and Bandura and Men-
love (1968) for full descriptions of the dog-phobia treatment.
Any reader who doubts that the seeming appropriateness of an action
is importantly influenced by the number of others performing it might
try a small experiment. Stand on a busy sidewalk, pick out an empty
spot in the sky or on a tall building, and stare at it for a full minute.
Very little will happen around you during that time—most people will
walk past without glancing up, and virtually no one will stop to stare
with you. Now, on the next day, go to the same place and bring along
four friends to look upward too. Within sixty seconds, a crowd of
passersby will have stopped to crane their necks skyward with the
group. For those pedestrians who do not join you, the pressure to look
up at least briefly will be nearly irresistible; if your experiment brings
the same results as the one performed by three New York social psycho-
logists, you and your friends will cause 80 percent of all passersby to
lift their gaze to your empty spot (Milgram, Bickman, and Berkowitz,
1967).
4. Other research besides O’Connor’s (1972) suggests that there are
two sides to the filmed-social-proof coin, however. The dramatic effect
of filmed depictions on what children find appropriate has been a source
of great distress for those concerned with frequent instances of violence
and aggression on television. Although the consequences of televised
violence on the aggressive actions of children are far from simple, the
data from a well-controlled experiment by psychologists Robert Liebert
and Robert Baron (1972) have an ominous look. Some children were
shown excerpts from a television program in which people intentionally

[PAGE 226]
216 / Influence
harmed another. Afterward, these children were significantly more
harmful toward another child than were children who had watched a
nonviolent television program (a horserace). The finding that seeing
others perform aggressively led to more aggression on the part of the
young viewers held true for the two age groups tested (five-to-six-year-
olds and eight-to-nine-year-olds) and for both girls and boys.
5. An engagingly written report of their complete findings is
presented in Festinger, Riecken, and Schachter’s (1956) book When
Prophecy Fails.
6. Perhaps because of the quality of ragged desperation with which
they approached their task, the believers were wholly unsuccessful at
enlarging their number. Not a single convert was gained. At that point,
in the face of the twin failures of physical and social proof, the cult
quickly disintegrated. Less than three weeks after the date of the pre-
dicted flood, group members were scattered and maintaining only
sporadic communication with one another. In one final—and ironic—dis-
confirmation of prediction, it was the movement that perished in the
flood.
Ruin has not always been the fate of doomsday groups whose predic-
tions proved unsound, however. When such groups have been able to
build social proof for their beliefs through effective recruitment efforts,
they have grown and prospered. For example, when the Dutch Ana-
baptists saw their prophesied year of destruction, 1533, pass unevent-
fully, they became rabid seekers after converts, pouring unprecedented
amounts of energy into the cause. One extraordinarily eloquent mission-
ary, Jakob van Kampen, is reported to have baptized one hundred
persons in a single day. So powerful was the snowballing social evidence
in support of the Anabaptist position that it rapidly overwhelmed the
disconfirming physical evidence and turned two thirds of the population
of Holland’s great cities into adherents.
7. From Rosenthal’s Thirty-eight Witnesses, 1964.
8. This quote comes from Latané and Darley’s award-winning book
(1968), where they introduced the concept of pluralistic ignorance.
The potentially tragic consequences of the pluralistic ignorance phe-
nomenon are starkly illustrated in a UPI news release from Chicago:
A university coed was beaten and strangled in daylight hours near
one of the most popular tourist attractions in the city, police said
Saturday.
The nude body of Lee Alexis Wilson, 23, was found Friday in
dense shrubbery alongside the wall of the Art Institute by a 12-
year-old boy playing in the bushes.

[PAGE 227]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 217
Police theorized she may have been sitting or standing by a
fountain in the Art Institute’s south plaza when she was attacked.
The assailant apparently then dragged her into the bushes. She
apparently was sexually assaulted, police said.
Police said thousands of persons must have passed the site and
one man told them he heard a scream about 2 P.M. but did not in-
vestigate because no one else seemed to be paying attention.
9. The New York “seizure” and “smoke” emergency studies are re-
ported by Darley and Latané (1968) and Latané and Darley (1968), re-
spectively. The Toronto experiment was performed by Ross (1971). The
Florida studies were published by Clark and Word in 1972 and 1974.
10. See a study by Latané and Rodin (1969) showing that groups of
strangers help less in an emergency than groups of acquaintances.
11. The wallet study was conducted by Hornstein et al. (1968), the
antismoking study by Murray et al. (1984), and the dental anxiety study
by Melamed et al. (1978).
12. The sources of these statistics are articles by Phillips in 1979 and
1980.
13. The newspaper story data are reported by Phillips (1974), while
the TV story data come from Bollen and Phillips (1982), Gould and
Schaffer (1986), Phillips and Carstensen (1986), and Schmidtke and
Hafner (1988).
14. These new data appear in Phillips (1983).
15. The quote is from The International Cyclopedia of Music and Musi-
cians, 1964, which Sabin edited.
16. From Hornaday (1887).