Chapter 2
RECIPROCATION

Chapter 2
RECIPROCATION
The Old Give and Take…and Take
Pay every debt, as if God wrote the bill.
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON
A FEW YEARS AGO, A UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR TRIED A LITTLE experi-
ment. He sent Christmas cards to a sample of perfect strangers.
Although he expected some reaction, the response he received was
amazing—holiday cards addressed to him came pouring back from the
people who had never met nor heard of him. The great majority of those
who returned a card never inquired into the identity of the unknown
professor. They received his holiday greeting card, click, and, whirr,
they automatically sent one in return. While small in scope, this study
nicely shows the action of one of the most potent of the weapons of in-
1
fluence around us—the rule for reciprocation. The rule says that we
should try to repay, in kind, what another person has provided us. If
a woman does us a favor, we should do her one in return; if a man
sends us a birthday present, we should remember his birthday with a
gift of our own; if a couple invites us to a party, we should be sure to
invite them to one of ours. By virtue of the reciprocity rule, then, we
are obligated to the future repayment of favors, gifts, invitations, and
the like. So typical is it for indebtedness to accompany the receipt of
such things that a term like “much obliged” has become a synonym for
“thank you,” not only in the English language but in others as well.
The impressive aspect of the rule for reciprocation and the sense of
obligation that goes with it is its pervasiveness in human culture. It is
so widespread that after intensive study, sociologists such as Alvin

[PAGE 24]
14 / Influence
Gouldner can report that there is no human society that does not sub-
2
scribe to the rule. And within each society it seems pervasive also; it
permeates exchanges of every kind. Indeed, it may well be that a de-
veloped system of indebtedness flowing from the rule for reciprocation
is a unique property of human culture. The noted archaeologist Richard
Leakey ascribes the essence of what makes us human to the reciprocity
system: “We are human because our ancestors learned to share their
3
food and their skills in an honored network of obligation,” he says.
Cultural anthropologists Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox view this “web of
indebtedness” as a unique adaptive mechanism of human beings, al-
lowing for the division of labor, the exchange of diverse forms of goods,
the exchange of different services (making it possible for experts to
develop), and the creation of a cluster of interdependencies that bind
4
individuals together into highly efficient units.
It is the future orientation inherent in a sense of obligation that is
critical to its ability to produce social advances of the sort described by
Tiger and Fox. A widely shared and strongly held feeling of future ob-
ligation made an enormous difference in human social evolution, be-
cause it meant that one person could give something (for example, food,
energy, care) to another with confidence that it was not being lost. For
the first time in evolutionary history, one individual could give away
any of a variety of resources without actually giving them away. The
result was the lowering of the natural inhibitions against transactions
that must be begun by one person’s providing personal resources to
another. Sophisticated and coordinated systems of aid, gift giving, de-
fense, and trade became possible, bringing immense benefit to the soci-
eties that possessed them. With such clearly adaptive consequences for
the culture, it is not surprising that the rule for reciprocation is so deeply
implanted in us by the process of socialization we all undergo.
I know of no better illustration of how reciprocal obligations can
reach long and powerfully into the future than the perplexing story of
five thousand dollars of relief aid that was sent in 1985 between Mexico
and the impoverished people of Ethiopia. In 1985 Ethiopia could justly
lay claim to the greatest suffering and privation in the world. Its eco-
nomy was in ruin. Its food supply had been ravaged by years of drought
and internal war. Its inhabitants were dying by the thousands from
disease and starvation. Under these circumstances, I would not have
been surprised to learn of a five-thousand-dollar relief donation from
Mexico to that wrenchingly needy country. I remember my chin hitting
my chest, though, when a brief newspaper item I was reading insisted
that the aid had gone in the opposite direction. Native officials of the
Ethiopian Red Cross had decided to send the money to help the victims
of that year’s earthquakes in Mexico City.

[PAGE 25]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 15
It is both a personal bane and a professional blessing that whenever
I am confused by some aspect of human behavior, I feel driven to in-
vestigate further. In this instance, I was able to track down a fuller ac-
count of the story. Fortunately a journalist who had been as bewildered
as I was by the Ethiopians’ action had asked for an explanation. The
answer he received offers eloquent validation of the reciprocity rule:
Despite the enormous needs prevailing in Ethiopia, the money was
being sent because Mexico had sent aid to Ethiopia in 1935, when it was
invaded by Italy. So informed, I remained awed, but I was no longer
puzzled. The need to reciprocate had transcended great cultural differ-
ences, long distances, acute famine, and immediate self-interest. Quite
simply, a half century later, against all countervailing forces, obligation
triumphed.
Make no mistake, human societies derive a truly significant compet-
itive advantage from the reciprocity rule, and consequently they make
sure their members are trained to comply with and believe in it. Each
of us has been taught to live up to the rule, and each of us knows about
the social sanctions and derision applied to anyone who violates it. The
labels we assign to such a person are loaded with negativity—moocher,
ingrate, welsher. Because there is general distaste for those who take
and make no effort to give in return, we will often go to great lengths
to avoid being considered one of their number. It is to those lengths
that we will often be taken and, in the process, be “taken” by individuals
who stand to gain from our indebtedness.
To understand how the rule for reciprocation can be exploited by
one who recognizes it as the source of influence it certainly is, we might
closely examine an experiment performed by Professor Dennis Regan
5
of Cornell University. A subject who participated in the study found
himself rating, along with another subject, the quality of some paintings
as part of an experiment on “art appreciation.” The other rater—we can
call him Joe—was only posing as a fellow subject and was actually Dr.
Regan’s assistant. For our purposes, the experiment took place under
two different conditions. In some cases, Joe did a small, unsolicited favor
for the true subject. During a short rest period, he left the room for a
couple of minutes and returned with two bottles of Coca-Cola, one for
the subject and one for himself, saying, “I asked him [the experimenter]
if I could get myself a Coke, and he said it was okay, so I bought one
for you, too.” In other cases, Joe did not provide the subject with a favor;
he simply returned from the two-minute break empty-handed. In all
other respects, however, Joe behaved identically.
Later on, after the paintings had all been rated and the experimenter
had momentarily left the room, Joe asked the subject to do him a favor.
He indicated that he was selling raffle tickets for a new car and that if

[PAGE 26]
16 / Influence
he sold the most tickets, he would win a fifty-dollar prize. Joe’s request
was for the subject to buy some raffle tickets at twenty-five cents apiece:
“Any would help, the more the better.” The major finding of the study
concerns the number of tickets subjects purchased from Joe under the
two conditions. Without question, Joe was more successful in selling
his raffle tickets to the subjects who had received his earlier favor. Ap-
parently feeling that they owed him something, these subjects bought
twice as many tickets as the subjects who had not been given the prior
favor. Although the Regan study represents a fairly simple demonstra-
tion of the workings of the rule for reciprocation, it illustrates several
important characteristics of the rule that, upon further consideration,
help us to understand how it may be profitably used.
The Rule Is Overpowering
One of the reasons reciprocation can be used so effectively as a device
for gaining another’s compliance is its power. The rule possesses awe-
some strength, often producing a “yes” response to a request that, except
for an existing feeling of indebtedness, would have surely been refused.
Some evidence of how the rule’s force can overpower the influence of
other factors that normally determine whether a request will be com-
plied with can be seen in a second result of the Regan study. Besides
his interest in the impact of the reciprocity rule on compliance, Regan
was also interested in how liking for a person affects the tendency to
comply with that person’s request. To measure how liking toward Joe
affected the subjects’ decisions to buy his raffle tickets, Regan had them
fill out several rating scales indicating how much they liked Joe. He
then compared their liking responses with the number of tickets they
had purchased from Joe. There was a significant tendency for subjects
to buy more raffle tickets from Joe the more they liked him. But this
alone is hardly a startling finding. Most of us would have guessed that
people are more willing to do a favor for someone they like.
The interesting thing about the Regan experiment, however, is that
the relationship between liking and compliance was completely wiped
out in the condition under which subjects had been given a Coke by
Joe. For those who owed him a favor, it made no difference whether
they liked him or not; they felt a sense of obligation to repay him, and
they did. The subjects in that condition who indicated that they disliked
Joe bought just as many of his tickets as did those who indicated that
they liked him. The rule for reciprocity was so strong that it simply
overwhelmed the influence of a factor—liking for the requester—that
normally affects the decision to comply.
Think of the implications. People we might ordinarily dislike—unsa-

[PAGE 27]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 17
vory or unwelcome sales operators, disagreeable acquaintances, repres-
entatives of strange or unpopular organizations—can greatly increase
the chance that we will do what they wish merely by providing us with
a small favor prior to their requests. Let’s take an example that by now
many of us have encountered. The Hare Krishna Society is an Eastern
religious sect with centuries-old roots traceable to the Indian city of
Calcutta. But its spectacular modern-day story occurred in the 1970s,
when it experienced a remarkable growth not only in followers but also
in wealth and property. The economic growth was funded through a
variety of activities, the principal and still most visible of which is the
request for donations by Society members from passersby in public
places. During the early history of the group in this country, the solicit-
ation for contributions was attempted in a fashion memorable for anyone
who saw it. Groups of Krishna devotees—often with shaved heads,
and wearing ill-fitting robes, leg wrappings, beads, and bells—would
canvass a city street, chanting and bobbing in unison while begging for
funds.
Although highly effective as a technique for gaining attention, this
form of fund-raising did not work especially well. The average Amer-
ican considered the Krishnas weird, to say the least, and was reluctant
to provide money to support them. It quickly became clear to the Society
that it had a considerable public-relations problem. The people being
asked for contributions did not like the way the members looked,
dressed, or acted. Had the Society been an ordinary commercial organ-
ization, the solution would have been simple—change the things the
public does not like. But the Krishnas are a religious organization; and
the way members look, dress, and act is partially tied to religious factors.
Because, in any denomination, religious factors are typically resistant
to change because of worldly considerations, the Krishna leadership
was faced with a real dilemma. On the one hand were beliefs, modes
of dress, and hairstyles that had religious significance. On the other
hand, threatening the organization’s financial welfare, were the less-
than-positive feelings of the American public toward these things.
What’s a sect to do?
The Krishnas’ resolution was brilliant. They switched to a fund-raising
tactic that made it unnecessary for target persons to have positive feel-
ings toward the fund-raisers. They began to employ a donation-request
procedure that engaged the rule for reciprocation, which, as demon-
strated by the Regan study, is strong enough to overcome the factor of
dislike for the requester. The new strategy still involves the solicitation
of contributions in public places with much pedestrian traffic (airports
are a favorite), but now, before a donation is requested, the target person
is given a “gift”—a book (usually the Bhagavad Gita), the Back to Godhead

[PAGE 28]
18 / Influence
magazine of the Society, or, in the most cost-effective version, a flower.
The unsuspecting passerby who suddenly finds a flower pressed into
his hands or pinned to his jacket is under no circumstances allowed to
give it back, even if he asserts that he does not want it. “No, it is our
gift to you,” says the solicitor, refusing to accept it. Only after the
Krishna member has thus brought the force of the reciprocation rule to
bear on the situation is the target asked to provide a contribution to the
Society. This benefactor-before-beggar strategy has been wildly success-
ful for the Hare Krishna Society, producing large-scale economic gains
and funding the ownership of temples, businesses, houses, and property
in 321 centers in the United States and overseas.
As an aside, it is instructive that the reciprocation rule has begun to
outlive its usefulness for the Krishnas, not because the rule itself is any
less potent societally, but because we have found ways to prevent the
Krishnas from using it on us. After once falling victim to their tactic,
many travelers are now alert to the presence of robed Krishna Society
solicitors in airports and train stations, adjusting their paths to avoid
an encounter and preparing beforehand to ward off a solicitor’s “gift.”
Although the Society has tried to counter this increased vigilance by
instructing members to be dressed and groomed in modern styles to
avoid immediate recognition when soliciting (some actually carry flight
bags or suitcases), even disguise has not worked especiallywell for
the Krishnas. Too many individuals now know better than toaccept
unrequested offerings in public places like airports. Furthermore,
airport administrators have initiated a number of procedures designed
to forewarn us of the Krishnas’ true identity and intent. Thus, it is now
common airport practice to restrict the Krishnas’ soliciting activity to
certain areas of the airport and to announce through signs and the
public address system that the Krishnas are soliciting there. It is a test-
ament to the societal value of reciprocation that we have chosen to fight
the Krishnas mostly by seeking to avoid rather than to withstand the
force of their gift giving. The reciprocity rule that empowers their tactic
is too strong—and socially beneficial—for us to want to violate it.
Politics is another arena in which the power of the reciprocity rule
shows itself. Reciprocation tactics appear at every level:
• At the top, elected officials engage in “logrolling” and the exchange
of favors that makes politics the place of strange bedfellows, indeed.
The out-of-character vote of one of our elected representatives on a
bill or measure can often be understood as a favor returned to the
bill’s sponsor. Political analysts were amazed at Lyndon Johnson’s
ability to get so many of his programs through Congress during his
early administration. Even members of congress who were thought

[PAGE 29]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 19
to be strongly opposed to the proposals were voting for them. Close
examination by political scientists has found the cause to be not so
much Johnson’s political savvy as the large score of favors he had
been able to provide to other legislators during his many years of
power in the House and Senate. As President, he was able to produce
a truly remarkable amount of legislation in a short time by calling in
those favors. It is interesting that this same process may account for
the problems Jimmy Carter had in getting his programs through
Congress during his early administration, despite heavy Democratic
majorities in both House and Senate. Carter came to the presidency
from outside the Capitol Hill establishment. He campaigned on his
outside-Washington identity, saying that he was indebted to no one
there. Much of his legislative difficulty upon arriving may be traced
to the fact that no one there was indebted to him.
• At another level, we can see the recognized strength of the reciprocity
rule in the desire of corporations and individuals to provide judicial
and legislative officials with gifts and favors, and in the series of
legal restrictions against such gifts and favors. Even with legitimate
political contributions, the stockpiling of obligations often underlies
the stated purpose of supporting a favorite candidate. One look at
the lists of companies and organizations that contribute to the cam-
paigns of both major candidates in important elections gives evidence
of such motives. A skeptic, requiring direct evidence of the quid pro
quo expected by political contributors, might look to the remarkably
bald-faced admission by Charles H. Keating, Jr., who was later con-
victed on multiple counts of fraud in this country’s savings and loan
disaster. Addressing the question of whether a connection existed
between the $1.3 million he had contributed to the campaigns of five
U.S. senators and their subsequent actions in his behalf against federal
regulators, he asserted, “I want to say in the most forceful way I can:
I certainly hope so.”
• At the grass-roots level, local political organizations have learned
that the principal way to keep their candidates in office is to make
sure they provide a wide range of little favors to the voters. The “ward
heelers” of many cities still operate effectively in this fashion. But
ordinary citizens are not alone in trading political support for small
personal favors. During the 1992 presidential primary campaign,
actress Sally Kellerman was asked why she was lending her name
and efforts to the candidacy of Democratic hopeful Jerry Brown. Her
reply: “Twenty years ago, I asked ten friends to help me move. He
was the only one who showed up.”
Of course, the power of reciprocity can be found in the merchandising

[PAGE 30]
20 / Influence
field as well. Although the number of possible examples is large, let’s
examine a pair of familiar ones deriving from the “free sample.” As a
marketing technique, the free sample has a long and effective history.
In most instances, a small amount of the relevant product is provided
to potential customers for the stated purpose of allowing them to try it
to see if they like it. And certainly this is a legitimate desire of the
manufacturer—to expose the public to the qualities of the product. The
beauty of the free sample, however, is that it is also a gift and, as such,
can engage the reciprocity rule. In true jujitsu fashion, the promoter
who gives free samples can release the natural indebting force inherent
in a gift while innocently appearing to have only the intention to inform.
A favorite place for free samples is the supermarket, where customers
are frequently provided with small cubes of a certain variety of cheese
or meat to try. Many people find it difficult to accept a sample from the
always-smiling attendant, return only the toothpick, and walk away.
Instead, they buy some of the product, even if they might not have liked
it especially well. A highly effective variation on this marketing proced-
ure is illustrated in the case, cited by Vance Packard in The Hidden Per-
suaders, of the Indiana supermarket operator who sold an astounding
one thousand pounds of cheese in a few hours one day by putting out
the cheese and inviting customers to cut off slivers for themselves as
free samples.
A different version of the free-sample tactic is used by the Amway
Corporation, a rapid-growth company that manufactures and distributes
household and personal-care products in a vast national network of
door-to-door neighborhood sales. The company, which has grown from
a basement-run operation a few years ago to a one-and-a-half-billion-
dollar-yearly-sales business, makes use of the free sample in a device
called the BUG. The BUG consists of a collection of Amway
products—bottles of furniture polish, detergent, or shampoo, spray
containers of deodorizers, insect killers, or window cleaners—carried
to the customer’s home in a specially designed tray or just a polyethyl-
ene bag. The confidential Amway Career Manual then instructs the
salesperson to leave the BUG with the customer “for 24, 48, or 72 hours,
at no cost or obligation to her. Just tell her you would like her to try the
products…. That’s an offer no one can refuse.” At the end of the trial
period, the Amway representative returns and picks up orders for those
of the products the customer wishes to purchase. Since few customers
use up the entire contents of even one of the product containers in such
a short time, the salesperson may then take the remaining product
portions in the BUG to the next potential customer down the line or
across the street and start the process again. Many Amway representat-
ives have several BUGs circulating in their districts at one time.

[PAGE 31]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 21
Of course, by now you and I know that the customer who has accep-
ted and used the BUG products has been trapped into facing the influ-
ence of the reciprocity rule. Many such customers yield to a sense of
obligation to order those of the salesperson’s products that they have
tried and thereby partially consumed. And, of course, by now the Am-
way Corporation knows that to be the case. Even in a company with
as excellent a growth record as Amway, the BUG device has created a
big stir. Reports by state distributors to the parent company record a
remarkable effect:
Unbelievable! We’ve never seen such excitement. Product is
moving at an unbelievable rate, and we’ve only just begun….
[Local] distributors took the BUGS, and we’ve had an unbelievable
increase in sales [from Illinois distributor]. The most fantastic retail
idea we’ve ever had!…On the average, customers purchased about
half the total amount of the BUG when it is picked up…. In one
word, tremendous! We’ve never seen a response within our entire
organization like this [from Massachusetts distributor].
The Amway distributors appear to be bewildered—happily so, but
nonetheless bewildered—by the startling power of the BUG. Of course,
by now you and I should not be.
The reciprocity rule governs many situations of a purely interpersonal
nature where neither money nor commercial exchange is at issue. Per-
haps my favorite illustration of the enormous force available from the
reciprocation weapon of influence comes from such a situation. The
European scientist, Eibl-Eibesfeldt, provides the account of a German
soldier during World War I whose job was to capture enemy soldiers
for interrogation. Because of the nature of the trench warfare at that
time, it was extremely difficult for armies to cross the no-man’s-land
between opposing front lines; but it was not so difficult for a single
soldier to crawl across and slip into an enemy trench position. The
armies of the Great War had experts who regularly did so to capture
an enemy soldier, who would then be brought back for questioning.
The German expert of our account had often successfully completed
such missions in the past and was sent on another. Once again, he
skillfully negotiated the area between fronts and surprised a lone enemy
soldier in his trench. The unsuspecting soldier, who had been eating at
the time, was easily disarmed. The frightened captive with only a piece
of bread in his hand then performed what may have been the most
important act of his life. He gave his enemy some of the bread. So af-
fected was the German by this gift that he could not complete his mis-
sion. He turned from his benefactor and recrossed the no-man’s-land
empty-handed to face the wrath of his superiors.

[PAGE 32]
22 / Influence
An equally compelling point regarding the power of reciprocity comes
from an account of a woman who saved her life not by giving a gift as
did the captured soldier, but by refusing a gift and the powerful obliga-
tions that went with it. The woman, Diane Louie, was an inhabitant of
Jonestown, Guyana, in November of 1978 when its leader, Jim Jones,
called for the mass suicide of all residents, most of whom compliantly
drank and died from a vat of poison-laced Kool-Aid. Diane Louie,
however, rejected Jones’s command and made her way out of Jonestown
and into the jungle. She attributes her willingness to do so to her earlier
refusal to accept special favors from him when she was in need. She
turned down his offer of special food while she was ill because “I knew
once he gave me those privileges, he’d have me. I didn’t want to owe
him nothin’.”
The Rule Enforces Uninvited Debts
Earlier we suggested that the power of the reciprocity rule is such that
by first doing us a favor, strange, disliked, or unwelcome others can
enhance the chance that we will comply with one of their requests.
However, there is another aspect of the rule, besides its power, that al-
lows this phenomenon to occur. Another person can trigger a feeling
of indebtedness by doing us an uninvited favor. Recall that the rule
only states that we should provide to others the kind of actions they
have provided us; it does not require us to have asked for what we have
received in order to feel obligated to repay. For instance, the Disabled
American Veterans organization reports that its simple mail appeal for
donations produces a response rate of about 18 percent. But when the
mailing also includes an unsolicited gift (gummed, individualized ad-
dress labels), the success rate nearly doubles to 35 percent. This is not
to say that we might not feel a stronger sense of obligation to return a
favor we have requested, only that such a request is not necessary to
produce our indebtedness.
If we reflect for a moment about the social purpose of the reciprocity
rule, we can see why this should be so. The rule was established to
promote the development of reciprocal relationships between individu-
als so that one person could initiate such a relationship without the fear
of loss. If the rule is to serve that purpose, then, an uninvited first favor
must have the ability to create an obligation. Recall, also, that reciprocal
relationships confer an extraordinary advantage upon cultures that
foster them and that, consequently, there will be strong pressures to
ensure that the rule does serve its purpose. Little wonder, then, that
the influential French anthropologist Marcel Mauss, in describing the
social pressures surrounding the gift-giving process in human culture,

[PAGE 33]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 23
can state, “There is an obligation to give, an obligation to receive, and
6
an obligation to repay.”
Although the obligation to repay constitutes the essence of the reci-
procity rule, it is the obligation to receive that makes the rule so easy
to exploit. The obligation to receive reduces our ability to choose whom
we wish to be indebted to and puts that power in the hands of others.
Let’s reexamine a pair of earlier examples to get a sense of how the
process works. First, let’s return to the Regan study, where we find that
the favor causing subjects to double the number of raffle tickets pur-
chased from Joe was not one they had requested. Joe had voluntarily
left the room and returned with one Coke for himself and one for the
subject. There was not a single subject who refused the Coke. It is easy
to see why it would have been awkward to turn down Joe’s favor: Joe
had already spent his money; a soft drink was an appropriate favor in
the situation, especially since Joe had one himself; it would have been
considered impolite to reject Joe’s thoughtful action. Nevertheless, re-
ceipt of that Coke produced an indebtedness that manifested itself
clearly when Joe announced his desire to sell some raffle tickets. Notice
the important asymmetry here—all the genuinely free choices were
Joe’s. He chose the form of the initial favor, and he chose the form of
the return favor. Of course, one could say that the subject had the choice
of saying no to both of Joe’s offers. But those would have been tough
choices. To have said no at either point would have required the subject
to go against the natural cultural forces favoring reciprocation arrange-
ments that Jujitsu Joe had aligned himself with.
The extent to which even an unwanted favor, once received, can
produce indebtedness is aptly illustrated in the soliciting technique of
the Hare Krishna Society. During systematic observation of the airport
soliciting strategy of the Krishnas, I have recorded a variety of responses
from target persons. One of the most regular occurs as follows. An air-
port visitor—a businessman, let’s say—is hurriedly walking along
through a densely peopled area. The Krishna solicitor steps in front of
7
him and hands him a flower. The man, reacting with surprise, takes it.
Almost immediately, he tries to give it back, saying that he does not
want the flower. The Krishna member responds that it is a gift from the
Krishna Society and that it is the man’s to keep…however, a donation
to further the Society’s good works would be appreciated. Again the
target protests, “I don’t want this flower. Here, take it.” And again the
solicitor refuses, “It’s our gift to you, sir.” There is visible conflict on
the businessman’s face. Should he keep the flower and walk away
without giving anything in return, or should he yield to the pressure
of the deeply ingrained reciprocity rule and provide a contribution? By
now, the conflict has spread from his face to his posture. He leans away

[PAGE 34]
24 / Influence
from his benefactor, seemingly about to break free, only to be drawn
back again by the pull of the rule. Once more his body tilts away, but
it’s no use; he cannot disengage. With a nod of resignation, he fishes in
his pocket and comes up with a dollar or two that is graciously accepted.
Now he can walk away freely, and he does, “gift” in hand, until he en-
counters a waste container—where he throws the flower.
Purely by accident, I happened to witness a scene that demonstrates
that the Krishnas know very well how frequently their gifts are un-
wanted by the people who receive them. While spending a day ob-
serving a soliciting Krishna group at Chicago’s O’Hare International
Airport a few years ago, I noticed that one of the group members would
frequently leave the central area and return with more flowers to resup-
ply her companions. As it happened, I had decided to take a break just
as she was leaving on one of her supply missions. Having nowhere to
go, I followed. Her journey turned out to be a garbage route. She went
from trash can to trash can beyond the immediate area to retrieve all
the flowers that had been discarded by Krishna targets. She then re-
turned with the cache of recovered flowers (some that had been recycled
who knows how many times) and distributed them to be profitably
cycled through the reciprocation process once more. The thing that
really impressed me about all this was that most of the discarded flowers
had brought donations from the people who had cast them away. The
nature of the reciprocity rule is such that a gift so unwanted that it was
jettisoned at the first opportunity had nonetheless been effective and
exploitable.
The ability of uninvited gifts to produce feelings of obligation is re-
cognized by a variety of organizations besides the Krishnas. How many
times have each of us received small gifts through the mail—personal-
ized address labels, greeting cards, key rings—from charity agencies
that ask for funds in an accompanying note? I have received five in just
the past year, two from disabled veterans’ groups and the others from
missionary schools or hospitals. In each case, there was a common
thread in the accompanying message. The goods that were enclosed
were to be considered a gift from the organization; and any money I
wished to send should not be regarded as payment but rather as a return
offering. As the letter from one of the missionary programs stated, the
packet of greeting cards I had been sent was not to be directly paid for,
but was designed “to encourage your kindness.” If we look past the
obvious tax advantage, we can see a reason why it would be beneficial
for the organization to have the cards viewed as a gift instead of mer-
chandise: There is a strong cultural pressure to reciprocate a gift, even
an unwanted one; but there is no such pressure to purchase an unwanted
commercial product.

[PAGE 35]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 25
The Rule Can Trigger Unfair Exchanges
There is yet one other feature of the reciprocity rule that allows it to be
exploited for profit. Paradoxically, the rule developed to promote equal
exchanges between partners, yet it can be used to bring about decidedly
unequal results. The rule demands that one sort of action be reciprocated
with a similar sort of action. A favor is to be met with another favor; it
is not to be met with neglect, and certainly not with attack. But within
the similar-action boundaries, considerable flexibility is allowed. A
small initial favor can produce a sense of obligation to agree to a sub-
stantially larger return favor. Since, as we have already seen, the rule
allows one person to choose the nature of the indebting first favor and
the nature of the debt-canceling return favor, we could easily be manip-
ulated into an unfair exchange by those who might wish to exploit the
rule.
Once again, we can turn to the Regan experiment for evidence. Re-
member in that study that Joe gave one group of subjects a bottle of
Coca-Cola as an initiating gift and later asked all subjects to buy some
of his raffle tickets at twenty-five cents apiece. What I have so far neg-
lected to mention is that the study was done in the late 1960s, when the
price of a Coke was a dime. The average subject who had been given a
ten-cent drink bought two of Joe’s raffle tickets, although some bought
as many as seven. Even if we look just at the average subject, though,
we can tell that Joe made quite a deal. A 500 percent return on invest-
ment is respectable indeed!
But in Joe’s case, even a 500 percent return amounted to only fifty
cents. Can the reciprocity rule produce meaningfully large differences
in the sizes of the exchanged favors? Under the right circumstances, it
certainly can. Take, for instance, the account of a student of mine con-
cerning a day she remembers ruefully:
About one year ago, I couldn’t start my car. As I was sitting there,
a guy in the parking lot came over and eventually jump-started
the car. I said thanks, and he said you’re welcome; as he was
leaving, I said that if he ever needed a favor to stop by. About a
month later, the guy knocked on my door and asked to borrow
my car for two hours as his was in the shop. I felt somewhat oblig-
ated but uncertain, since the car was pretty new and he looked
very young. Later, I found out that he was underage and had no
insurance. Anyway, I lent him the car. He totaled it.
How could it happen that an intelligent young woman would agree
to turn over her new car to a virtual stranger (and a youngster at that)

[PAGE 36]
26 / Influence
because he had done her a small favor a month earlier? Or, more gen-
erally, why should it be that small first favors often stimulate larger
return favors? One important reason concerns the clearly unpleasant
character of the feeling of indebtedness. Most of us find it highly dis-
agreeable to be in a state of obligation. It weighs heavily on us and de-
mands to be removed. It is not difficult to trace the source of this feeling.
Because reciprocal arrangements are so vital in human social systems,
we have been conditioned to be uncomfortable when beholden. If we
were to ignore breezily the need to return another’s initial favor, we
would stop one reciprocal sequence dead and would make it less likely
that our benefactor would do such favors in the future. Neither event
is in the best interests of society. Consequently, we are trained from
childhood to chafe, emotionally, under the saddle of obligation. For
this reason alone, then, we may be willing to agree to perform a larger
favor than we received, merely to relieve ourselves of the psychological
burden of debt.
But there is another reason as well. A person who violates the reci-
procity rule by accepting without attempting to return the good acts of
others is actively disliked by the social group. The exception, of course,
is when the person is prevented from repayment by reasons of circum-
stance or ability. For the most part, however, there is a genuine distaste
for individuals who fail to conform to the dictates of the reciprocity
8
rule. Moocher and welsher are unsavory labels to be scrupulously
shunned. So undesirable are they that we will sometimes agree to an
unequal exchange in order to dodge them.
In combination, the reality of internal discomfort and the possibility
of external shame can produce a heavy psychological cost. When seen
in the light of this cost, it is not so puzzling that we will often give back
more than we have received in the name of reciprocity. Neither is it so
odd that, as was shown in an experiment conducted at the University
of Pittsburgh, people will often avoid asking for a needed favor if they
will not be in a position to repay it. The psychological cost may simply
outweigh the material loss.
The risk of still other kinds of losses may also persuade people to
decline certain gifts and benefits. Women frequently comment on the
uncomfortable sense of obligation they can feel to return the favors of
a man who has given them an expensive present or paid for a costly
evening out. Even something as small as the price of a drink can produce
a feeling of debt. A student in one of my classes expressed it quite
plainly in a paper she wrote: “After learning the hard way, I no longer
let a guy I meet in a club buy my drinks because I don’t want either of
us to feel that I am obligated sexually.” Research suggests that there is
a basis for her concern. If, instead of paying for them herself, a woman

[PAGE 37]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 27
allows a man to buy her drinks, she is immediately judged (by both
9
men and women) as more sexually available to him.
RECIPROCAL CONCESSIONS
There is a second way to employ the reciprocity rule to get someone to
comply with a request. It is more subtle than the direct route of
providing that person with a favor and then asking for one in return;
yet in some ways it is more devastatingly effective than the straightfor-
ward approach. A personal experience I had a few years ago gave me
firsthand evidence of just how well this compliance technique works.
I was walking down the street when I was approached by an eleven-
or twelve-year-old boy. He introduced himself and said that he was
selling tickets to the annual Boy Scouts circus to be held on the upcoming
Saturday night. He asked if I wished to buy any at five dollars apiece.
Since one of the last places I wanted to spend Saturday evening was
with the Boy Scouts, I declined. “Well,” he said, “if you don’t want to
buy any tickets, how about buying some of our big chocolate bars?
They’re only a dollar each.” I bought a couple and, right away, realized
that something noteworthy had happened. I knew that to be the case
because: (a) I do not like chocolate bars; (b) I do like dollars; (c) I was
standing there with two of his chocolate bars; and (d) he was walking
away with two of my dollars.
To try to understand precisely what had happened, I went to my office
and called a meeting of my research assistants. In discussing the situ-
ation, we began to see how the reciprocity rule was implicated in my
compliance with the request to buy the candy bars. The general rule
says that a person who acts in a certain way toward us is entitled to a
similar return action. We have already seen that one consequence of
the rule is an obligation to repay favors we have received. Another
consequence of the rule, however, is an obligation to make a concession
to someone who has made a concession to us. As my research group
thought about it, we realized that was exactly the position the Boy Scout
had put me in. His request that I purchase some one-dollar chocolate
bars had been put in the form of a concession on his part; it was
presented as a retreat from his request that I buy some five-dollar tickets.
If I were to live up to the dictates of the reciprocation rule, there had to
be a concession on my part. As we have seen, there was such a conces-
sion: I changed from noncompliant to compliant when he changed from
a larger to a smaller request, even though I was not really interested in
either of the things he offered.
It was a classic example of how a weapon of automatic influence can
infuse a compliance request with its power. I had been moved to buy

[PAGE 38]
28 / Influence
something not because of any favorable feelings toward the item, but
because the purchase request had been presented in a way that drew
force from the reciprocity rule. It had not mattered that I do not like
chocolate bars; the Boy Scout had made a concession to me, click, and,
whirr, I responded with a concession of my own. Of course, the tendency
to reciprocate a concession is not so strong that it will invariably work
in all instances on all people; none of the weapons of influence con-
sidered in this book is that strong. However, in my exchange with the
Boy Scout, the tendency had been sufficiently potent to leave me in
mystified possession of a pair of unwanted and overpriced candy bars.
Why should I feel a strain to reciprocate a concession? The answer
rests once again in the benefit of such a tendency to the society. It is in
the interests of any human group to have its members working together
toward the achievement of common goals. However, in many social
interactions the participants begin with requirements and demands
that are unacceptable to one another. Thus the society must arrange to
have these initial, incompatible desires set aside for the sake of socially
beneficial cooperation. This is accomplished through procedures that
promote compromise. Mutual concession is one important such proced-
ure.
The reciprocation rule brings about mutual concession in two ways.
The first is obvious. It pressures the recipient of an already-made con-
cession to respond in kind. The second, while not so obvious, is pivotally
important. Just as in the case of favors, gifts, or aid, the obligation to
reciprocate a concession encourages the creation of socially desirable
arrangements by ensuring that anyone seeking to start such an arrange-
ment will not be exploited. After all, if there were no social obligation
to reciprocate a concession, who would want to make the first sacrifice?
To do so would be to risk giving up something and getting nothing
back. However, with the rule in effect, we can feel safe making the first
sacrifice to our partner, who is obligated to offer a return sacrifice.
Because the rule for reciprocation governs the compromise process,
it is possible to use an initial concession as part of a highly effective
compliance technique. The technique is a simple one that we can call
the rejection-then-retreat technique. Suppose you want me to agree to
a certain request. One way to increase your chances would be first to
make a larger request of me, one that I will most likely turn down. Then,
after I have refused, you would make the smaller request that you were
really interested in all along. Provided that you have structured your
requests skillfully, I should view your second request as a concession
to me and should feel inclined to respond with a concession of my own,

[PAGE 39]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 29
the only one I would have immediately open to me—compliance with
your second request.
Was that how the Boy Scout got me to buy his candy bars? Was his
retreat from the five-dollar request to the one-dollar request an artificial
one that was intentionally designed to sell candy bars? As one who has
still refused to discard even his first Scout merit badge, I genuinely
hope not. But whether or not the large-request-then-smaller-request
sequence was planned, its effect was the same, It worked. And because
it works, the rejection-then-retreat technique can and will be used pur-
posely by certain people to get their way. First let’s examine how this
tactic can be used as a reliable compliance device. Later we will see how
it is already being used. Finally we can turn to a pair of little-known
features of the technique that make it one of the most pervasively influ-
ential compliance tactics available.
Remember that after my encounter with the Boy Scout, I called my
research assistants together to try to understand what had happened
to me and, as it turned out, to eat the evidence. Actually, we did more
than that. We designed an experiment to test the effectiveness of the
procedure of moving to a desired request after a larger preliminary re-
quest had been refused. We had two primary purposes in conducting
the experiment. First, we wanted to see whether this procedure worked
on people besides myself. That is, it certainly seemed that the tactic had
been effective when tried on me earlier in the day; but then, I have a
history of falling for compliance tricks of all sorts. So the question re-
mained, Does the rejection-then-retreat technique work on enough
people to make it a useful procedure for gaining compliance? If so, it
would definitely be something to be aware of in the future.
Our second reason for doing the study was to determine how
powerful a compliance device the technique was. Could it bring about
compliance with a genuinely sizable request? In other words, did the
smaller request to which the requester retreated have to be a small re-
quest? If our thinking about what caused the technique to be effective
was correct, the second request did not actually have to be small; it only
had to be smaller than the initial one. It was our suspicion that the
critical thing about a requester’s retreat from a larger to a smaller favor
was its appearance as a concession. So the second request could be an
objectively large one—as long as it was smaller than the first re-
quest—and the technique would still work.
After a bit of thought, we decided to try the technique on a request
that we felt few people would agree to perform. Posing as representat-
ives of the “County Youth Counseling Program,” we approached college
students walking on campus and asked if they would be willing to
chaperon a group of juvenile delinquents on a day trip to the zoo. The

[PAGE 40]
30 / Influence
idea of being responsible for a group of juvenile delinquents of unspe-
cified age for hours in a public place without pay was hardly an inviting
one for these students. As we expected, the great majority (83 percent)
refused. Yet we obtained very different results from a similar sample
of college students who were asked the very same question with one
difference. Before we invited them to serve as unpaid chaperons on the
zoo trip, we asked them for an even larger favor—to spend two hours
per week as a counselor to a juvenile delinquent for a minimum of two
years. It was only after they refused this extreme request, as all did,
that we made the smaller, zoo-trip request. By presenting the zoo trip
as a retreat from our initial request, our success rate increased dramat-
ically. Three times as many of the students approached in this manner
10
volunteered to serve as zoo chaperons.
Be assured that any strategy able to triple the percentage of compli-
ance with a substantial request (from 17 percent to 50 percent in our
experiment) will be frequently employed in a variety of natural settings.
Labor negotiators, for instance, often use the tactic of beginning with
extreme demands that they do not actually expect to win but from
which they can retreat in a series of seeming concessions designed to
draw real concessions from the opposing side. It would appear, then,
that the larger the initial request, the more effective the procedure, since
there would be more room available for illusory concessions. This is
true only up to a point, however. Research conducted at Bar-Ilan Uni-
versity in Israel on the rejection-then-retreat technique shows that if
the first set of demands is so extreme as to be seen as unreasonable, the
11
tactic backfires. In such cases, the party who has made the extreme
first request is not seen to be bargaining in good faith. Any subsequent
retreat from that wholly unrealistic initial position is not viewed as a
genuine concession and thus is not reciprocated. The truly gifted nego-
tiator, then, is one whose initial position is exaggerated enough to allow
for a series of reciprocal concessions that will yield a desirable final offer
from the opponent, yet is not so outlandish as to be seen as illegitimate
from the start.
It seems that certain of the most successful television producers, such
as Grant Tinker and Gary Marshall, are masters of this art in their nego-
tiations with network censors. In a candid interview with TV Guide
writer Dick Russell, both admitted to “deliberately inserting lines into
scripts that a censor’s sure to ax” so that they could then retreat to the
lines they really wanted included. Marshall appears especially active
in this regard. Consider, for example, the following quotes from Russell’s
article:

[PAGE 41]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 31
But Marshall…not only admits his tricks…he seems to revel in
them. On one episode of his [then] top-rated Laverne and Shirley
series, for example, he says, “We had a situation where Squiggy’s
in a rush to get out of his apartment and meet some girls upstairs.
He says: ‘Will you hurry up before I lose my lust?’ But in the script
we put something even stronger, knowing the censors would cut
it. They did; so we asked innocently, well, how about ‘lose my
lust’? ‘That’s good,’ they said. Sometimes you gotta go at ’em
backward.”
On the Happy Days series, the biggest censorship fight was over
the word “virgin.” That time, says Marshall, “I knew we’d have
trouble, so we put the word in seven times, hoping they’d cut six
and keep one. It worked. We used the same pattern again with
12
the word ‘pregnant.’”
I witnessed another form of the rejection-then-retreat technique in
my investigations of door-to-door sales operations. These organizations
used a less engineered, more opportunistic version of the tactic. Of
course, the most important goal for a door-to-door salesperson is to
make the sale. However, the training programs of each of the companies
I investigated emphasized that a second important goal was to obtain
from prospects the names of referrals—friends, relatives, or neighbors
on whom we could call. For a variety of reasons we will discuss in
Chapter 5, the percentage of successful door-to-door sales increases
impressively when the sales operator is able to mention the name of a
familiar person who “recommended” the sales visit.
Never as a sales trainee was I taught to get the sales pitch refused so
that I could then retreat to a request for referrals. In several such pro-
grams, though, I was trained to take advantage of the opportunity to
secure referrals offered by a customer’s purchase refusal: “Well, if it is
your feeling that a fine set of encyclopedias is not right for you at this
time, perhaps you could help me by giving me the names of some others
who might wish to take advantage of our company’s great offer. What
would be the names of some of these people you know?” Many indi-
viduals who would not otherwise subject their friends to a high-pressure
sales presentation do agree to supply referrals when the request is
presented as a concession from a purchase request they have just re-
fused.
We have already discussed one reason for the success of the rejection-
then-retreat technique—its incorporation of the reciprocity rule. This
larger-then-smaller-request strategy is effective for a pair of other
reasons as well. The first concerns the perceptual contrast principle we

[PAGE 42]
32 / Influence
encountered in