Chapter 1. That principle accounted for, among other

Chapter 1. That principle accounted for, among other
things, the tendency of a man to spend more money on a sweater fol-
lowing his purchase of a suit than before: After being exposed to the
price of the large item, the price of the less expensive one appears smaller
by comparison. In the same way, the larger-then-smaller-request pro-
cedure makes use of the contrast principle by making the smaller request
look even smaller by comparison with the larger one. If I want you to
lend me five dollars, I can make it seem like a smaller request by first
asking you to lend me ten dollars. One of the beauties of this tactic is
that by first requesting ten dollars and then retreating to five dollars, I
will have simultaneously engaged the force of the reciprocity rule and
the contrast principle. Not only will my five-dollar request be viewed
as a concession to be reciprocated, it will also look to you like a smaller
request than if I had just asked for it straightaway.
In combination, the influences of reciprocity and perceptual contrast
can present a fearsomely powerful force. Embodied in the rejection-
then-retreat sequence, their conjoined energies are capable of genuinely
astonishing effects. It is my feeling that they provide the only really
plausible explanation of one of the most baffling political actions of our
time: the decision to break into the Watergate offices of the Democratic
National Committee that led to the ruin of Richard Nixon’s presidency.
One of the participants in that decision, Jeb Stuart Magruder, upon first
hearing that the Watergate burglars had been caught, responded with
appropriate bewilderment, “How could we have been so stupid?” In-
deed, how?
To understand how enormously ill conceived an idea it was for the
Nixon administration to undertake the break-in, it is necessary to review
a few facts:
• The idea was that of G. Gordon Liddy, who was in charge of intelli-
gence-gathering operations for the Committee to Re-elect the Presid-
ent (CRP). Liddy had gained a reputation among administration
higher-ups as something of a flake, and there were questions about
his stability and judgment.
• Liddy’s proposal was extremely costly, requiring a budget of $250,000
in untraceable cash.
• In late March, when the proposal was approved in a meeting of the
CRP director, John Mitchell, and his assistants Magruder and Freder-
ick LaRue, the outlook for a Nixon victory in the November election
could not have been brighter. Edmund Muskie, the only announced
candidate the early polls had given a chance of unseating the Presid-
ent, had done poorly in the primaries. It looked very much as though

[PAGE 43]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 33
the most defeatable candidate, George McGovern, would win his
party’s nomination. A Republican victory seemed assured.
• The break-in plan itself was a highly risky operation requiring the
participation and discretion of ten men.
• The Democratic National Committee and its chairman, Lawrence
O’Brien, whose Watergate office was to be burglarized and bugged,
had no information damaging enough to defeat the incumbent Pres-
ident. Nor were they likely to get any, unless the administration did
something very, very foolish.
Despite the obvious counsel of the above reasons, the expensive,
chancy, pointless, and potentially calamitous proposal of a man whose
judgment was known to be questionable was approved. How could it
be that intelligent men of the attainment of Mitchell and Magruder
would do something so very, very foolish? Perhaps the answer lies in a
little-discussed fact: The $250,000 plan they approved was not Liddy’s
first proposal. In fact, it represented a significant concession on his part
from two earlier proposals, of immense proportions. The first of these
plans, made two months earlier in a meeting with Mitchell, Magruder,
and John Dean, described a $I million program that included (in addition
to the bugging of the Watergate) a specially equipped communications
“chase plane,” break-ins, kidnapping and mugging squads, and a yacht
featuring “high-class call girls” to blackmail Democratic politicians. A
second Liddy plan, presented a week later to the same group of Mitchell,
Magruder, and Dean, eliminated some of the program and reduced the
cost to $500,000. It was only after these initial proposals had been rejec-
ted by Mitchell that Liddy submitted his “bare-bones” $250,000 plan,
in this instance to Mitchell, Magruder, and Frederick LaRue. This time
the plan, still stupid but less so than the previous ones, was approved.
Could it be that I, a longtime patsy, and John Mitchell, a hardened
and canny politician, might both have been so easily maneuvered into
bad deals by the same compliance tactic—I by a Boy Scout selling candy,
and he by a man selling political disaster?
If we examine the testimony of Jeb Magruder, considered by most
Watergate investigators to provide the most faithful account of the
crucial meeting at which Liddy’s plan was finally accepted, there are
some instructive clues. First, Magruder reports that “no one was partic-
ularly overwhelmed with the project”; but “after starting at the grandi-
ose sum of $1 million, we thought that probably $250,000 would be an
acceptable figure…. We were reluctant to send him away with nothing.”
Mitchell, caught up in the “feeling that we should leave Liddy a little
something…signed off on it in the sense of saying, ‘Okay, let’s give him
a quarter of a million dollars and let’s see what he can come up with.’”

[PAGE 44]
34 / Influence
In the context of Liddy’s initial extreme requests, it seems that “a
quarter of a million dollars” had come to be “a little something” to be
left as a return concession. With the clarity afforded by hindsight, Ma-
gruder has recalled Liddy’s approach in as succinct an illustration of
the rejection-then-retreat technique as I have ever heard. “If he had
come to us at the outset and said, ‘I have a plan to burglarize and
wiretap Larry O’Brien’s office,’ we might have rejected the idea out of
hand. Instead he came to us with his elaborate call-girl/kidnap-
ping/mugging/sabotage/wiretapping scheme…. He had asked for the
whole loaf when he was quite content to settle for half or even a
13
quarter.”
It is also instructive that, although he finally deferred to his boss’s
decision, only one member of the group, Frederick LaRue, expressed
any direct opposition to the proposal. Saying with obvious common
sense, “I don’t think it’s worth the risk,” he must have wondered why
his colleagues Mitchell and Magruder did not share his perspective. Of
course, there could be many differences between LaRue and the other
two men that may have accounted for their differing opinions regarding
the advisability of Liddy’s plan. But one stands out: Of the three, only
LaRue had not been present at the prior two meetings, where Liddy
had outlined his much more ambitious programs. Perhaps, then, only
LaRue was able to see the third proposal for the clunker that it was and
to react to it objectively, uninfluenced by the reciprocity and perceptual
contrast forces acting upon the others.
A bit earlier we said that the rejection-then-retreat technique had, in
addition to the reciprocity rule, a pair of other factors working in its
favor. We have already discussed the first of those factors, the percep-
tual contrast principle. The additional advantage of the technique is
not really a psychological principle, as in the case of the other two
factors; it is more of a purely structural feature of the request sequence.
Let’s once again say that I wish to borrow five dollars from you. By
beginning with a ten-dollar request, I really can’t lose. If you agree to
it, I will have gotten twice the amount from you I would have settled
for. If, on the other hand, you turn down my initial request, I can retreat
to the five-dollar favor that I desired from the outset and, through the
action of the reciprocity and contrast principles, greatly enhance my
likelihood of success. Either way, I benefit; it’s a case of heads I win,
tails you lose.
The clearest utilization of this aspect of the larger-then-smaller-request
sequence occurs in the retail-store sales practice of “talking the top of
the line.” Here the prospect is invariably shown the deluxe model first.
If the customer buys, there is frosting on the store’s cake. However, if
the customer declines, the salesperson effectively counteroffers with a

[PAGE 45]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 35
more reasonably priced model. Some proof of the effectiveness of this
procedure comes from a report in Sales Management magazine, reprinted
without comment in Consumer Reports:
If you were a billiard-table dealer, which would you advertise—the
$329 model or the $3,000 model? The chances are you would pro-
mote the low-priced item and hope to trade the customer up when
he comes to buy. But G. Warren Kelley, new business promotion
manager at Brunswick, says you could be wrong…. To prove his
point, Kelley has actual sales figures from a representative store….
During the first week, customers…were shown the low end of the
line…and then encouraged to consider more expensive mod-
els—the traditional trading-up approach…. The average table sale
that week was $550…. However, during the second week, custom-
ers…were led instantly to a $3,000 table, regardless of what they
wanted to see…and then allowed to shop the rest of the line, in
declining order of price and quality. The result of selling down
14
was an average sale of over $1,000.
Given the remarkable effectiveness of the rejection-then-retreat
technique, one might think that there could be a substantial disadvant-
age as well. The victims of the strategy might resent having been
cornered into compliance. The resentment could show itself in a couple
of ways. First, the victim might decide not to live up to the verbal
agreement made with the requester. Second, the victim might come to
distrust the manipulative requester, deciding never to deal with him
again. If either or both of these events occurred with any frequency, a
requester would want to give serious second thought to the use of the
rejection-then-retreat procedure. Research indicates, however, that these
victim reactions do not occur with increased frequency when the rejec-
tion-then-retreat technique is used. Somewhat astonishingly, it appears
that they actually occur less frequently! Before trying to understand
why this is the case, let’s first look at the evidence.
A study published in Canada throws light on the question of
whether a victim of the rejection-then-retreat tactic will follow through
with the agreement to perform the requester’s second favor. In addition
to recording whether target persons said yes or no to the desired request
(to work for two unpaid hours one day in a community mental-health
agency), this experiment also recorded whether they showed up to
perform their duties as promised. As usual, the procedure of starting
with a larger request (to volunteer for two hours of work per week in
the agency for at least two years) produced more verbal agreement to
the smaller retreat request (76 percent) than did the procedure of asking
for the smaller request alone (29 percent). The important result, though,

[PAGE 46]
36 / Influence
concerned the show-up rate of those who volunteered; and, again, the re-
jection-then-retreat procedure was the more effective one (85 percent
15
vs. 50 percent).
A different experiment examined whether the rejection-then-retreat
sequence caused victims to feel so manipulated that they would refuse
any further requests. In this study, the targets were college students
who were each asked to give a pint of blood as part of the annual cam-
pus blood drive. One group of targets was first asked to give a pint of
blood every six weeks for a minimum of three years. The other targets
were asked only to give the single pint of blood. Those of both groups
who agreed to give a pint of blood and who later appeared at the blood
center were then asked if they would be willing to give their phone
numbers so they could be called upon to donate again in the future.
Nearly all the students who were about to give a pint of blood as a
result of the rejection-then-retreat technique agreed to donate again
later (84 percent), while less than half of the other students who ap-
peared at the blood center did so (43 percent). Even for future favors,
16
the rejection-then-retreat strategy proved superior.
Strangely enough, then, it seems that the rejection-then-retreat tactic
spurs people not only to agree to a desired request but actually to carry
out the request and, finally, to volunteer to perform further requests.
What could there be about the technique that makes people who have
been duped into compliance so bewilderingly likely to continue to
comply? For an answer, we might look at the requester’s act of conces-
sion, which is the heart of the procedure. We have already seen that as
long as it is not viewed to be a transparent trick, the concession will
likely stimulate a return concession. But what we have not yet examined
is a little-known pair of positive by-products of the act of concession:
feelings of greater responsibility for, and satisfaction with, the arrange-
ment. It is this set of sweet side effects that enables the technique to
move its victims to fulfill their agreements and to engage in further
such agreements.
The desirable side effects of making a concession during an interaction
with another person are nicely shown in studies of the way people
bargain with each other. One experiment, conducted by social psycho-
17
logists at UCLA, offers an especially apt demonstration. A subject in
that study faced a “negotiation opponent” and was told to bargain with
the opponent concerning how to divide between themselves a certain
amount of money provided by the experimenters. The subject was also
informed that if no mutual agreement could be reached after a certain
period of bargaining, no one would get any money. Unknown to the
subjects, the opponent was really an experimental assistant who had

[PAGE 47]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 37
been previously instructed to bargain with the subject in one of three
ways. With some of the subjects, the opponent made an extreme first
demand, assigning virtually all of the money to himself, and stubbornly
persisted in that demand throughout the negotiations. With another
group of subjects, the opponent began with a demand that was moder-
ately favorable to himself; he, too, steadfastly refused to move from
that position during the negotiations. With a third group, the opponent
began with the extreme demand and then gradually retreated to the
more moderate one during the course of the bargaining.
There were three important findings in this experiment that help us
to understand why the rejection-then-retreat technique is so effective.
First, compared to the two other approaches, the strategy of starting
with an extreme demand and then retreating to the more moderate one
produced the most money for the person using it. But this result is not
very surprising in light of the previous evidence we have seen of the
power of larger-then-smaller-request tactics to bring about profitable
agreements. It is the two additional findings of the study that are more
striking.
Responsibility. Those subjects facing the opponent who used the re-
treating strategy felt most responsible for the final deal. Much more
than the subjects who faced a nonchanging negotiation opponent, these
subjects reported that they had successfully influenced the opponent
to take less money for himself. Of course, we know that they hadn’t
done any such thing. The experimenter had instructed their opponent
to retreat gradually from his initial demand no matter what the subjects
did. But it appeared to these subjects that they had made the opponent
change, that they had produced his concessions. The result was that they
felt more responsible for the final outcome of the negotiations. It does
not require much of a leap from this finding to clarify the previous
mystery of why the rejection-then-retreat technique causes its targets
to live up to their agreements with such astounding frequency. The re-
quester’s concession within the technique not only causes targets to say
yes more often, it also causes them to feel more responsible for having
“dictated” the final agreement. Thus the uncanny ability of the rejection-
then-retreat technique to make its targets meet their commitments be-
comes understandable: A person who feels responsible for the terms
of a contract will be more likely to live up to that contract.
Satisfaction. Even though, on the average, they gave the most money
to the opponent who used the concessions strategy, the subjects who
were the targets of this strategy were the most satisfied with the final
arrangement. It appears that an agreement that has been forged through
the concessions of one’s opponent is quite satisfying. With this in mind,
we can begin to explain the second previously puzzling feature of the

[PAGE 48]
38 / Influence
rejection-then-retreat tactic—the ability to prompt its victims to agree
to further requests. Since the tactic uses a concession to bring about
compliance, the victim is likely to feel more satisfied with the arrange-
ment as a result. And it stands to reason that people who are satisfied
with a given arrangement are more likely to be willing to agree to further
such arrangements.
HOW TO SAY NO
When up against a requester who employs the rule for reciprocation,
you and I face a formidable foe. Whether by presenting us with an initial
favor or initial concession, the requester will have enlisted a powerful
ally in the campaign for our compliance. At first glance, our fortunes
in such a situation would appear dismal. We could comply with the
requester’s wish and, in so doing, succumb to the reciprocity rule. Or,
we could refuse to comply and thereby suffer the brunt of the rule’s
force upon our deeply conditioned feelings of fairness and obligation.
Surrender or suffer heavy casualties. Cheerless prospects indeed.
Fortunately, these are not our only choices. With the proper under-
standing of the nature of our opponent, we can come away from the
compliance battlefield unhurt and sometimes even better off than before.
It is essential to recognize that the requester who invokes the reciproc-
ation rule (or any other weapon of influence) to gain our compliance is
not the real opponent. Such a requester has chosen to become a jujitsu
warrior who aligns himself with the sweeping power of reciprocation
and then merely releases that power by providing a first favor or con-
cession. The real opponent is the rule. If we are not to be abused by it,
we must take steps to defuse its energy.
But how does one go about neutralizing the effect of a social rule like
that for reciprocation? It seems too widespread to escape and too strong
to overpower once it is activated. Perhaps the answer, then, is to prevent
its activation. Perhaps we can avoid a confrontation with the rule by
refusing to allow the requester to commission its force against us in the
first place. Perhaps by rejecting the requester’s initial favor or concession
to us, we can evade the problem. Perhaps; but then, perhaps not. Invari-
ably declining the requester’s initial offer of a favor or sacrifice works
better in theory than in practice. The major problem is that when it is
first presented, it is difficult to know whether such an offer is honest
or whether it is the initial step in an exploitation attempt. If we always
assume the worst, it would not be possible to receive the benefits of
any legitimate favors or concessions offered by individuals who had
no intention of exploiting the reciprocity rule.
I have a colleague who remembers with anger how his ten-year-old

[PAGE 49]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 39
daughter’s feelings were terribly hurt by a man whose method of
avoiding the jaws of the reciprocity rule was to refuse abruptly her
kindness. The children of her class were hosting an open house at school
for their grandparents, and her job was to give a flower to each visitor
entering the school grounds. But the first man she approached with a
flower growled at her, “Keep it.” Not knowing what to do, she extended
it toward him again only to have him demand to know what he had to
give in return. When she replied weakly, “Nothing. It’s a gift,” he fixed
her with a disbelieving glare, insisted that he recognized “her game,”
and brushed on past. The girl was so stung by the experience that she
could not approach anyone else and had to be removed from her assign-
ment—one she had anticipated fondly. It is hard to know whom to
blame more here, the insensitive man or the exploiters who had abused
his mechanical tendency to reciprocate a gift until his response had
soured to a mechanical refusal. No matter whom you find more
blameworthy, the lesson is clear. We will always encounter authentically
generous individuals as well as many people who try to play fairly by
the reciprocity rule rather than to exploit it. They will doubtless become
insulted by someone who consistently rejects their efforts; social friction
and isolation could well result. A policy of blanket rejection, then, seems
ill advised.
Another solution holds more promise. It advises us to accept the de-
sirable first offers of others but to accept those offers only for what they
fundamentally are, not for what they are represented to be. If a person
offers us a nice favor, let’s say, we might well accept, recognizing that
we have obligated ourselves to a return favor sometime in the future.
To engage in this sort of arrangement with another is not to be exploited
by that person through the rule for reciprocation. Quite the contrary;
it is to participate fairly in the “honored network of obligation” that
has served us so well, both individually and societally, from the dawn
of humanity. However, if the initial favor turns out to be a device, a
trick, an artifice designed specifically to stimulate our compliance with
a larger return favor, that is a different story. Here our partner is not a
benefactor but a profiteer. And it is here that we should respond to his
action on precisely those terms. Once we have determined that his initial
offer was not a favor but a compliance tactic, we need only react to it
accordingly to be free of its influence. As long as we perceive and define
his action as a compliance device instead of a favor, he no longer has
the reciprocation rule as an ally: The rule says that favors are to be met
with favors; it does not require that tricks be met with favors.
A practical example may make things more concrete. Let’s suppose
that a woman phoned one day and introduced herself as a member of

[PAGE 50]
40 / Influence
the Home Fire Safety Association in your town. Suppose she then asked
if you would be interested in learning about home fire safety, having
your house checked for fire hazards, and receiving a home fire extin-
guisher, all free of charge. Let’s suppose further that you were interested
in these things and made an evening appointment to have one of the
Association’s inspectors come over to provide them. When he arrived,
he gave you a small hand extinguisher and began examining the possible
fire hazards of your home. Afterward, he gave you some interesting,
though frightening, information about general fire dangers, along with
an assessment of your home’s vulnerability. Finally, he suggested that
you get a home fire-warning system and left.
Such a set of events is not implausible. Various cities and towns have
nonprofit associations, usually made up of Fire Department personnel
working on their own time, that provide free home fire-safety inspec-
tions of this sort. Were these events to occur, you would clearly have
been done a favor by the inspector. In accordance with the reciprocation
rule, you should stand more ready to provide a return favor if you were
to see him in need of aid at some point in the future. An exchange of
favors of this kind would be in the best tradition of the reciprocity rule.
A similar set of events with, however, a different ending would also
be possible—in fact, more likely. Rather than leaving after recommend-
ing a fire-alarm system, the inspector would launch into a sales
presentation intended to persuade you to buy an expensive, heat-
triggered alarm system manufactured by the company he represented.
Door-to-door home fire-alarm companies will frequently use this ap-
proach. Typically, their product, while effective enough, will be over-
priced. Trusting that you will not be familiar with the retail costs of
such a system and that, if you decide to buy one, you will feel obligated
to the company that provided you with a free extinguisher and home
inspection, these companies will pressure you for an immediate sale.
Using this free-information-and-inspection gambit, fire-protection sales
18
organizations have flourished around the country.
If you were to find yourself in such a situation with the realization
that the primary motive of the inspector’s visit was to sell you a costly
alarm system, your most effective next action would be a simple, private
maneuver. It would involve the mental act of redefinition. Merely define
whatever you have received from the inspector—extinguisher, safety
information, hazard inspection—not as gifts, but as sales devices, and
you will be free to decline (or accept) his purchase offer without even
a tug from the reciprocity rule: A favor rightly follows a favor—not a
piece of sales strategy. And if he subsequently responds to your refusal
by proposing that you, at least, give him the names of some friends he
might call on, use your mental maneuver on him again. Define his retreat

[PAGE 51]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 41
to this smaller request as what (it is hoped after reading this chapter)
you recognize it to be—a compliance tactic. Once done, there would be
no pressure to offer the names as a return concession, since his reduced
request would not be viewed as a real concession. At this point, un-
hampered by an inappropriately triggered sense of obligation, you may
once again be as compliant or noncompliant as you wish.
Provided you are so inclined, you might even turn his own weapon
of influence against him. Recall that the rule for reciprocation entitles
a person who has acted in a certain way to a dose of the same thing. If
you have determined that the “fire inspector’s” gifts were used, not as
genuine gifts, but to make a profit from you, then you might want to
use them to make a profit of your own. Simply take whatever the in-
spector is willing to provide—safety information, home extinguish-
er—thank him politely, and show him out the door. After all, the reci-
procity rule asserts that if justice is to be done, exploitation attempts
should be exploited.
READER’S REPORT
From a Former TV and Stereo Salesperson
“For quite a while, I worked for a major retailer in their Television and
Stereo Department. Salespeople in this department are paid on a com-
mission basis; however, continued employment was, and still is, based
on the ability to sell service contracts rather than merchandise. Company
policy was that, for every ten sales you made, you had to sell at least
four service contracts. Failure to bring your service-contract sales up
to expected levels for two consecutive months resulted in threats, relo-
cation, or termination.
“Once I recognized the importance of meeting my sales-contract
quota, I devised a plan that used the rejection-then-retreat technique,
although I didn’t know its name at the time: A customer had the oppor-
tunity to buy from one to three years’ worth of service-contract coverage
at the time of the sale. Most of the sales staff attempted just to sell a
single-year policy. That was my intention as well, since a one-year
contract counted just as much toward my quota as a three-year contract
did. Initially, however, when making my sales pitch, I would advocate
the longest and most expensive plan, realizing that most people would
not be willing to spend that much (about $140). But this gave me an
excellent opportunity later, after being rejected in my sincere attempt
to sell the three-year plan, to retreat to the one-year extension and its
relatively small $34.95 price, which I was thrilled to get. This proved
highly effective, as I sold sales contracts to an average of seventy percent
of my customers, who seemed very satisfied with the purchase while

[PAGE 52]
42 / Influence
others in my department clustered around forty percent. I never told
anyone how I did it until now.”
Notice how, as is usually the case, use of the rejection-then-retreat
tactic engages the action of the contrast principle as well. Not only did
the $140 initial request make the $34.95 request seem like a retreat, it
made that second request seem smaller too.

[PAGE 53]