CHAPTER 2 (PAGES 17–56)

CHAPTER 2 (PAGES 17–56)
1. A formal description of the greeting-card study is provided in Kunz
and Woolcott (1976).
2. Certain societies have formalized the rule into ritual. Consider for
example the “Vartan Bhanji,” an institutionalized custom of the gift
exchange common to parts of Pakistan and India. In commenting upon
the “Vartan Bhanji,” Gouldner (1960) remarks:
It is…notable that the system painstakingly prevents the total
elimination of outstanding obligations. Thus, on the occasion of
a marriage, departing guests are given gifts of sweets. In weighing
them out, the hostess may say, “These five are yours,” meaning
“These are a repayment for what you formerly gave me,” and then
she adds an extra measure, saying, “These are mine.” On the next
occasion, she will receive these back along with an additional
measure which she later returns, and so on.
3. The quote is from Leakey and Lewin (1978).
4. For a fuller discussion, see Tiger and Fox (1971).
5. The experiment is reported formally in Regan (1971).
6. The statement appears in Mauss (1954).
7. Surprise is an effective compliance producer in its own right. People
who are surprised by a request will often comply because they are
momentarily unsure of themselves and, consequently, influenced easily.
For example, the social psychologists Stanley Milgram and John Sabini
(1975) have shown that people riding on the New York subway were
twice as likely to give up their seats to a person who surprised them
with the request “Excuse me. May I have your seat?” than to one who
forewarned them first by mentioning to a fellow passenger that he was
thinking of asking for someone’s seat (56 percent vs. 28 percent).
8. It is interesting that a cross-cultural study has shown that those
who break the reciprocity rule in the reverse direction—by giving
without allowing the recipient an opportunity to repay—are also dis-
liked for it. This result was found to hold for each of the three national-

[PAGE 223]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 213
ities investigated—Americans, Swedes, and Japanese. See Gergen et al.
(1975) for an account of the study.
9. The Pittsburgh study was done by Greenberg and Shapiro. The
data on women’s sexual obligations were collected by George, Gournic,
and McAfee (1988).
10. To convince ourselves that this result was no fluke, we conducted
two more experiments testing the effectiveness of the rejection-then-
retreat trick. Both showed results similar to the first experiment. See
Cialdini et al. (1975) for the details of all three.
11. The Israeli study was conducted in 1979 by Schwartzwald, Raz,
and Zvibel.
12. The TV Guide article appeared in December 1978.
13. The source for the quotes is Magruder (1974).
14. Consumer Reports, January 1975, p. 62.
15. Another way of gauging the effectiveness of a request technique
is to examine the bottom-line proportion of individuals who, after being
asked, complied with the request. Using such a measure, the rejection-
then-retreat procedure was more than four times more effective than
the procedure of asking for the smaller request only. See Miller et al.
(1976) for a complete description of the study.
16. The blood-donation study was reported by Cialdini and Ascani
(1976).
17. The UCLA study was performed by Benton, Kelley, and Liebling
in 1972.
18. A variety of other business operations use the no-cost information
offer extensively. Pest-exterminator companies, for instance, have found
that most people who agree to a free home examination give the exterm-
ination job to the examining company, provided they are convinced
that it is needed. They apparently feel an obligation to give their business
to the firm that rendered the initial, complimentary service. Knowing
that such customers are unlikely to comparisonshop for this reason,
unscrupulous pest-control operators will take advantage of the situation
by citing higher-than-competitive prices for work commissioned in this
way.