Chapter 4
SOCIAL PROOF

Chapter 4
SOCIAL PROOF
Truths Are Us
Where all think alike, no one thinks very much.
—WALTER LIPPMANN
I DON’T KNOW ANYONE WHO LIKES CANNED LAUGHTER. IN FACT, when
I surveyed the people who came into my office one day—several
students, two telephone repairmen, a number of university professors,
and the janitor—the reaction was invariably critical. Television, with
its incessant system of laugh tracks and technically augmented mirth,
received the most heat. The people I questioned hated canned laughter.
They called it stupid, phony, and obvious. Although my sample was
small, I would bet that it closely reflects the negative feelings of most
of the American public toward laugh tracks.
Why, then, is canned laughter so popular with television executives?
They have won their exalted positions and splendid salaries by knowing
how to give the public what it wants. Yet they religiously employ the
laugh tracks that their audiences find distasteful. And they do so over
the objections of many of their most talented artists. It is not uncommon
for acclaimed directors, writers, or actors to demand the elimination of
canned responses from the television projects they undertake. These
demands are only sometimes successful, and when they are, it is not
without a battle.
What could it be about canned laughter that is so attractive to televi-
sion executives? Why would these shrewd and tested businessmen
champion a practice that their potential watchers find disagreeable and
their most creative talents find personally insulting? The answer is at

[PAGE 98]
88 / Influence
once simple and intriguing: They know what the research says. Exper-
iments have found that the use of canned merriment causes an audience
to laugh longer and more often when humorous material is presented
and to rate the material as funnier. In addition, some evidence indicates
1
that canned laughter is most effective for poor jokes.
In the light of these data, the actions of television executives make
perfect sense. The introduction of laugh tracks into their comic program-
ming will increase the humorous and appreciative responses of an
audience, even—and especially—when the material is of poor quality.
Is it any surprise, then, that television, glutted as it is with artless situ-
ation-comedy attempts, should be saturated with canned laughter?
Those executives know precisely what they are doing.
But with the mystery of the widespread use of laugh tracks solved,
we are left with a more perplexing question: Why does canned laughter
work on us the way it does? It is no longer the television executives
who appear peculiar; they are acting logically and in their own interests.
Instead, it is the behavior of the audience, of you and me, that seems
strange. Why should we laugh more at comedy material afloat in a sea
of mechanically fabricated merriment? And why should we think that
comic flotsam funnier? The executives aren’t really fooling us. Anyone
can recognize dubbed laughter. It is so blatant, so clearly counterfeit,
that there could be no confusing it with the real thing. We know full
well that the hilarity we hear is irrelevant to the humorous quality of
the joke it follows, that it is created not spontaneously by a genuine
audience, but artificially by a technician at a control board. Yet, trans-
parent forgery that it is, it works on us!
To discover why canned laughter is so effective, we first need to un-
derstand the nature of yet another potent weapon of influence: the
principle of social proof. It states that one means we use to determine
what is correct is to find out what other people think is correct. The
principle applies especially to the way we decide what constitutes cor-
rect behavior. We view a behavior as more correct in a given situation
to the degree that we see others performing it. Whether the question is
what to do with an empty popcorn box in a movie theater, how fast to
drive on a certain stretch of highway, or how to eat the chicken at a
dinner party, the actions of those around us will be important in defining
the answer.
The tendency to see an action as more appropriate when others are
doing it normally works quite well. As a rule, we will make fewer
mistakes by acting in accord with social evidence than contrary to it.
Usually, when a lot of people are doing something, it is the right thing
to do. This feature of the principle of social proof is simultaneously its

[PAGE 99]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 89
major strength and its major weakness. Like the other weapons of influ-
ence, it provides a convenient shortcut for determining how to behave
but, at the same time, makes one who uses the shortcut vulnerable to
the attacks of profiteers who lie in wait along its path.
In the case of canned laughter, the problem comes when we begin
responding to social proof in such a mindless and reflexive fashion that
we can be fooled by partial or fake evidence. Our folly is not that we
use others’ laughter to help decide what is humorous and when mirth
is appropriate; that is in keeping with the well-founded principle of
social proof. The folly is that we do so in response to patently fraudulent
laughter. Somehow, one disembodied feature of humor—a
sound—works like the essence of humor. The example from