CHAPTER 6 (PAGES 208–236)

CHAPTER 6 (PAGES 208–236)
1. The quote is from Milgram’s 1963 article in the Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology.
2. All of these variations on the basic experiment, as well as several
others, are presented in Milgram’s highly readable book Obedience to
Authority, 1974. A review of much of the subsequent research on obed-
ience can be found in Blass (1991).
3. In fact, Milgram first began his investigations in an attempt to un-
derstand how the German citizenry could have participated in the
concentration-camp destruction of millions of innocents during the
years of Nazi ascendancy. After testing his experimental procedures in
the United States, he had planned to take them to Germany, a country
whose populace he was sure would provide enough obedience for a
full-blown scientific analysis of the concept. That first eye-opening ex-
periment in New Haven, Connecticut, however, made it clear that he
could save his money and stay close to home. “I found so much obedi-
ence,” he has said, “I hardly saw the need of taking the experiment to
Germany.”
More telling evidence, perhaps, of a willingness within the American
character to submit to authorized command comes from a national
survey taken after the trial of Lieutenant William Calley, who ordered
his soldiers to kill the inhabitants—from the infants and toddlers
through their parents and grandparents—of My Lai, Vietnam (Kelman
and Hamilton, 1989). A majority of Americans (51 percent) responded
that, if so ordered, in a similar context, they too would shoot all the
residents of a Vietnamese village. But Americans have no monopoly
on the need to obey. When Milgram’s basic procedure has been repeated
in Holland, Germany, Spain, Italy, Australia, and Jordan, the results
have been similar. See Meeus and Raaijmakers for a review.
4. We are not the only species to give sometimes wrongheaded defer-
ence to those in authority positions. In monkey colonies, where rigid
dominance hierarchies exist, beneficial innovations (like learning how
to use a stick to bring food into the cage area) do not spread quickly
through the group unless they are taught first to a dominant animal.
When a lower animal is taught the new concept first, the rest of the
colony remains mostly oblivious to its value. One study, cited by Ardry
(1970), on the introduction of new food tastes to Japanese monkeys
provides a nice illustration. In one troop, a taste for caramels was de-
veloped by introducing this new food into the diet of young peripherals,
low on the status ladder. The taste for caramels inched slowly up the
ranks: A year and a half later, only 51 percent of the colony had acquired

[PAGE 231]
Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 221
it, and still none of the leaders. Contrast this with what happened in a
second troop where wheat was introduced first to the leader: Wheat
eating—to this point unknown to these monkeys—spread through the
whole colony within four hours.
5. The experiment was performed by Wilson (1968).
6. The study on children’s judgments of coins was done by Bruner
and Goodman (1947). The study on college students’ judgments was
done by Dukes and Bevan (1952). In addition to the relationship between
importance (status) and perceived size that both of these experiments
show, there is even some evidence that the importance we assign to
our identity is reflected in the size of a frequent symbol of that identity:
our signature. The psychologist Richard Zweigenhaft (1970) has collec-
ted data suggesting that as a man’s sense of his own status grows, so
does the size of his signature. This finding may give us a secret way of
discovering how the people around us view their own status and im-
portance: Simply compare the size of their signature to that of their
other handwriting.
7. Subhumans are not alone in this regard, even in modern times. For
example, since 1900 the U.S. presidency has been won by the taller of
the major-party candidates in twenty-one of the twenty-four elections.
8. From Hofling et al. (1966).
9. Additional data collected in the same study suggest that nurses
may not be conscious of the extent to which the title Doctor sways their
judgments and actions. A separate group of thirty-three nurses and
student nurses were asked what they would have done in the experi-
mental situation. Contrary to the actual findings, only two predicted
that they would have given the medication as ordered.
10. See Bickman (1974) for a complete account of this research. Similar
results have been obtained when the requester was female (Bushman,
1988).
11. This experiment was conducted by Lefkowitz, Blake, and Mouton
(1955).
12. The horn-honking study was published in 1968 by Anthony Doob
and Alan Gross.
13. For evidence, see Choo (1964), and McGuinnies and Ward (1980).
14. See Settle and Gorden (1974), Smith and Hunt (1978), and Hunt,
Domzal, and Kernan (1981).