[PAGE 1]


[PAGE 2]


[PAGE 3]
Begin Reading
Table of Contents
About the Author
Copyright Page
 
Thank you for buying this
St. Martin's Press ebook.
 
To receive special of fers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
 
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
 
For email updates on the author , click here.

[PAGE 4]
The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your
personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available
in any way. Copyright infringement is against the law . If you
believe the copy of this e-book you are reading infring es on the
author ’ s co pyright, ple ase notify the publi sher at:
us.macmillanusa.com/piracy .

[PAGE 5]
Foreword
Many years ago, Bill Bonnstetter and his son David developed a
revolutionary software system based on the DISC method —a way of
describing human communication and classifying behavior and the
method that is used throug hout this book. Sadly , Bill has since
passed away , but David continues to run their company—TTI
Success Insigh ts—to this day. From its humble origins in rural Iowa,
this method of behavior profiling has now been used by businesses
and corporations all around the world.
It all began with one question. A simple, specific question : Could an
agricultural salesperson sell more seed simply by looking at a farm?
As a child growing up in rural Iowa, I watched my father apply the
foundational principles of William Moulton Marston’ s Emotions of
Normal People.  At the time, my father was focused on Buyer Profile
Blending, giving agricultural salespeople the knowledge of Marston’ s
tools to better understand themselves and their farmer customers. I
can still recall the earliest days, sitting at a knotty-pine table over
meals of hot pork tenderloins and roast corn, when my father was
working through his observations. “Pristine driveways and neat
groves? Definitely a Blue. New and experimental livestock and
buildings? Y ou’re looking at a Red.”
Although we were close, our paths were incredibly different. My
father , a true entrepreneur and Red/Y ellow in every sense of the
phrase, was driven to build consulting firms and agencies that
helped salespe ople refine their craft. I sought the collegiate path,

[PAGE 6]
attending university at the University of Iowa, leanin g into my
Red/Blue nature while studying accounting and computer science. I
spent my free time in the computer lab, pouring my soul into
programs through my fingertips. While I was studying, my father
perfected his wizardlike ability to understand people.
My father and I always remained close and spoke to each other
most weeks, even though we were at different milestones in our
lives. While I was studying at the University of Iowa, my father sat
me down and asked me about contributing to his venture. He asked,
“What if we could couple your ability to develop software with my
ability to analyze human behavior?” I was ambitious, hungry for fun
coding work, and proceeded to embark on the most exciting journey
of my life. Together , we built a software system that would produce
reports about human behavior . This was a multiplying factor; soon
we were able to reach more people and reveal a person ’s potential
through 3.5-inch floppy disks and twenty-four-page reports. My
father and I built a company , TTI Success Insights, in 1984 in Iowa to
do just that.
Over time, we escaped the frigid winters in the Midwes t of the
United States, relocated ourselves, our families, and our business to
sunny and warm Scottsdale, Arizona. In the late nineties,  we began
using the web for distribution  of our famed assessments. Today , we
have a thriving business with distributors all over the world.
Up until now, you might have wondered why you are so different.
Human behavior is, for the most part, complex and nebulous. In
some cases, the people around us are idiotic. Understanding human
behavior is a never-ending task, an endless pursuit to know the how,
what, and why behind a person’ s choices. It is both easy and
dangerous to categorize someone who behaves differently from you
as ignorant, wrong, or even thickheaded. Today’ s world requires a
more sophisticated understanding where you value a person for his
or her strengths and weaknesses.
My father has since passed on. But the purpose we invoked, to
reveal human potential, continues to live on. This book is written

[PAGE 7]
about the concepts my father applied in sales trainings and applies
them to an even more complex situation—understanding the idiots
who surround us all.
As you read, I think you will understand the worth of a Red, a
Yellow , a Green, and a Blue. I hope you will pull away some practical
advice in communicating effectively with each type. But the most
important lesso n that you can walk away with is that the idiots who
surround you are, in fact, not idiots at all. Instead, they are
individuals worthy of respect, understanding, and being valued.
Anyone can use the frame works outlined in this book to get
ahead in the game of life. And look at it this way: If you don’t
understand and use the princ iples, you’ll continue to be surrounded
by idiots. And nobody wants that.
—David Bonnstetter
Chief Executive Officer
TTI Success Insights

[PAGE 8]
Introduction
The Man Who W as Surrounded by Idiots
I was in high school when I first noticed that I got along better with
certain people rather than others. It was easy to talk to some of my
friends; in any conversation,  we always found the right words and
everything just flowed smoothly . There were never any conflicts, and
we liked one another . With other people, however , everything just
went wrong. What I said fell on deaf ears, and I couldn’t understand
why.
Why was speaking to some people so easy, while others were
total blockheads? Since I was young, this certainly wasn’t something
that kept me awake at night. However , I still remember puzzling over
why some conversations flowed naturally , while others didn’t even
start—no matter how I conducted myself. It was just
incomprehensible. I began using different methods to test people. I
tried to say the same things in similar contexts just to see what
reaction I got. Sometimes it actually worked and an interesting
discussion developed. On other occasions, nothing happened at all.
People just stared at me as if I were from another planet, and
sometimes it really felt that way .
When we’re young, we tend to think of things very simply .
Because some people in my circle of friends reacted in a normal way
that meant, of course, that they were automatically the good guys.
And so I just assumed there was something wrong with the people
who didn’t understand me. What other explanation could there
possibly be? I was the same all the time! Certain people just had

[PAGE 9]
something wrong with them. So I simply began to avoid these weird,
difficult people  because I didn’t understand them. Call it the naïveté
of youth if you will, but it did give rise to some amusing
consequences. In later years, however , all of this changed.
Life went on with work, family, and career , and I continued to
pigeonhole people into two groups—good and sensible people and
all the rest, the people who didn’t seem to understand anything at all.
When I was twenty-five years old, I met with a man who was self-
employed. Now in his sixties, Sture had founded his own business
and built it up for many years. I was given the task of interviewing
him just before a new project was to be implemented. We started
talking about how things were  functioning in his organization. One of
the very first comments Sture made was that he was surrounded by
idiots. I remem ber laughing at the time because I thoug ht it was a
joke. But he truly meant what he said. His face turned crimson as he
explained to me that the people working in Department A were
complete idiots, every single one of them. In Department B you
found only fools who unders tood nothing at all. And he hadn’t even
come to Department C yet! They were the worst of all! They were so
weird that Sture couldn’t fathom how they even made it to work in
the mornings.
The more I listened to him, the more I realized that there was
something very odd about this story . I asked him if he really believed
that he was surrounded by idiots. He glared at me and explained that
very few of his employees were worth having.
Sture had no issue letting his employees know how he felt. He
didn’t hesitate in the least to call anyone an idiot in front of the whole
company . This meant that his employees learned to avoid him. No
one dared to have one-to-one meetings with him; he never got to
hear bad news because he would often shoot the messenger . At one
of the offices, a warning light had even been mounted at the
entrance to the building. Discreetly placed above the reception desk,
the light went red when he was there and turned green when he was
away .

[PAGE 10]
Everyone knew about this. Not only staff but even clients would
automatically cast a nervous glance at the light to find out what
awaited them when they stepped over the threshold. If the light was
red, some people would simply turn back at the door, deciding to
come back at a more opportune time.
As we all know , when you’re young you are full of great ideas. So
I asked the only question I could think of: “Who hired all these
idiots?” I knew , of course, that he had hired most of them. What was
worse was that Sture unders tood exactly what I had implied. What I
implicitly asked was: Who is actually the idiot here?
Sture threw me out. Later on, I was told that what he really
wanted to do was fetch a shotgun and shoot me.
This incident got me thinking. Here was a man who would soon
retire. He was obviously a proficient entrepreneur , highly respected
for his sound knowledge of his particular line of busine ss. But he
couldn’t handle people. He didn’t understand the most critical,
complicated resource in an organization—the employees. And
anyone he couldn’t understand was simply an idiot.
Since I was from outside the company , I could easily see how
wrong his thinking was. Sture didn’t grasp that he always compared
people to himself. His definition of idiocy was simply anyone who
didn’t think or act like him. He used expressions that I also used to
use about certain types of people: “arrogant windbags,” “red-tape
jackasses,” “rude bastards,”  and “tedious blockheads.” Although I
never called people idiots, at least not so they could hear me, I had
obvious problems with certain types of people.
It was an utterly appalling thought to have to go through life
constantly thinking that I was surrounded by people who were
impossible to work with. It would make my own potential in life so
unbelievably limited.
I tried to see myself in the mirror . The decision was easy to make.
I didn’t want to be like Sture . After a particularly toxic meeting with
him and some  of his unfortunate colleagues, I sat in the car with a
lump in my stomach. The meeting had been a total disaster .

[PAGE 11]
Everyone was furious. There and then I decided to learn what is
probably the most important knowledge of all—how people function.
I would be encountering people for the rest of my life, no matter what
my profession was, and it was easy to see that I would benefit by
being able to understand them.
I immediately began to study  how to understand the peop le who
initially seem so difficult. Why are some people silent, why do others
never stop talking, why do some people always tell the truth while
others never do? Why do some of my colleagues always arrive on
time, while others rarely manage to? And even why did I like some
people more than others? The insights I gained were fascinating,
and I’ve never been the same since I began this journey . The
knowledge I acquired has changed me as a person, as a friend, as a
colleague, as a son, as a husband, and as the father of my children.
This book is about what is perhaps the world’ s most widely used
method to describe the differences in human communication. This
method is called the DISA—a n acronym that stands for Dominance,
Inducement, Submission, and Analytic ability—system. These four
terms are the primary behav ior types, which describe how people
sees themselves in relationship to their environment. Each of these
behavior types is associated with a color—Red, Yellow , Green, and
Blue. This system is also commonly called the DISC system, where
the final letter of the acronym stands for Compliance instead of
Analytic ability . I have used variations of this tool for over twenty
years with excellent results.
But how do you become really , truly proficient at handling
different types of people? There are, of course, various methods.
The most common method is to research the matter and learn the
basics. But learning the theoretical part doesn’t make you a world-
class communicator . It’s only when you begin using this knowledge
that you can develop real and functioning competence in the field.
Just like learning to ride a bike—you have get on the bike first. Only
then do you realize what you need to do.

[PAGE 12]
Since I began studying how people function and painstakingly
strove to understand the differences in the way we communicate,
I’ve never been the same. I’m not as categorical anymore, judging
people just because they are not like me. For many years now, my
patience with people who are the complete opposite of me has been
far greater . I wouldn’t go so far as to say that I never get involved in
conflicts, just as I wouldn’t try to convince you that I never lie, but
both these things happen very seldom now .
I have one thing to thank Sture for—he awakened my interest in
the subject. Without him, this book would probably never have been
written.
What can you do to increase your knowledge about how people
relate and communicate? A good start may be to keep reading this
book—the whole book, not just the first three chapters. With a little
luck, in a few minutes you can begin the same journey I began
twenty years ago. I promise you will not regret it.
One thing to note: To simplify reading this book, I have chosen to
use “him” and “he” consis tently when I refer to examples not
associated with any specific person. I know that you have enough
imagination to insert a “her” or “she” in your thoughts where this may
be appropriate

[PAGE 13]
1
Communication Happens on the
Listener’s Terms
Does that sound strange? Let me explain. Everything you say to a
person is filtered through his frames of reference, biases, and
preconceived ideas. What remains is ultimately the message that he
understands. For many different reasons, he can interpret what you
want to convey  in a totally different way than you intende d. What is
actually understood will, naturally , vary depending on who you are
speaking to, but it is very rare that the entire message gets through
exactly as you conceived it in your mind.
It may feel depressing knowin g that you have so little control over
what your listener understands. No matter how much sense you
would like to knock into the other person’ s head, there’ s not that
much you can do about it. This is one of the many challenges of
communication. You simply can’t change how the listener functions.
However , most people are aware of and sensitive to how they want
to be treated. By adjusting yourself to how other people want to be
treated, you become more ef fective in your communication.
Why Is This So Important?
You help other people unders tand you by creating a secure arena for
communication—on their terms. Then the listener can use his energy

[PAGE 14]
to unde rstand rather than to consciously or unconscious ly react to
your manner of communicating.
All of us need to develop our flexibility and so be able to vary our
style of communication, adapting it when we speak to people who
are different from us. Here we find another truth: No matter what
method you choose to communicate with, as an individual, you will
always be in the minority . No matter what kind of behavior you have,
the majority of people aroun d you will function differently from you.
You can’t just base your method of communication on your own
preferences. Flexibility and the ability to interpret other people’ s
needs is what characterizes a good communicator .
Knowing and understanding another person’ s style of behavior
and method of communicatio n will result in more educated guesses
about how a person may possibly react in various situations. This
understanding will also dramatically increase your ability to get
through to the person in question.
No System Is Perfect
Let me be clear about one important point: This book doesn’t claim
to be totally comprehensive with respect to how we, as people,
communicate with each other . No book can do that, because the
number of signals we constantly transmit to those around us
wouldn’t fit into any book. Even if we could include body language,
the differences between male and female dialogue , cultural
differences, and all the other ways to define variations in
communication, we wouldn’t be able to write everything down. We
could add psychological aspects, graphology , age, and astrology and
still not get a 100 percent complete picture.
According to the American Journal of Business Education
(July/August 2013), more than 50 million assessments have been
made using the DISA tool. And yet even with all this information
communication remains a fascinating and puzzling topic. People are
not Excel spreadsheets. We can’t calculate everything. We’re way
too intricate to be described in full. Even the youngest child is far

[PAGE 15]
more intricate than anything that could be conveyed in a book.
However , we can avoid the most blatant blunders by understanding
the basics of human communication.
It’s Been Going On for a While
“We see what we do, but we do not see why we do what we do.
Thus, we assess and appraise each other through what we see that
we do.”
These words come from the psychoanalyst Carl Jung. Different
behavior patterns are what creates dynamism in our lives. When I
refer to behavi or patterns, I don’t just mean how a person acts in a
single instance  (his actions) but rather the whole set of attitudes,
beliefs, and approaches that govern how a person acts. We can
recognize ourselves in certain behavior patterns, but other forms of
behavior we neither recognize nor understand. Besides, each of us
acts differently in different situations, which can be a sourc e of either
joy or irritation for those around us.
Though individual actions can, of course, be right or wrong, there
is really no pattern of behavior that is right or wrong. There is no
such thing as proper behavior or incorrect behavior . You are who you
are, and there’ s no point in wondering why. You’re fine no matter
how you’re wired. No matter how you choose to behave, no matter
how you are perceived, you are fine. Within reasonable limits, of
course.
In a perfect world, it would be easy just to say, “I’m a particular
kind of person  and it’s okay because I read it in a book. That’ s just
how I am and this is how I act.” Sure, wouldn’t it be great not to have
to mish andle your own behavior? To always be able to act and
behave precisely as you feel at the time? You can do that. You can
behave exactly as you wish. All you have to do is find the right
situation in which to do so.
There are two situations in which you can just be you:
The first situati on is when you’re alone in a room. Then it doesn’t
matter how you speak or what you do. It doesn’t hurt anyone if you

[PAGE 16]
scream and swear or if you just want to sit silently and ponder the
great mysteries  of life or wonder why fashion models always look so
mad. In your solitude, you can behave exactly the way you feel.
Simple, isn’t it?
The second situation where you can completely be yourself is
when all the other people in the room are exactly like you. What did
our mothers teach us? Treat others as you want to be treated.
Excellent advice and very well intentioned. And it works, too—as
long as everyone is just like you. All you need to do is make a list of
all the people you know who believe, think, and act exactly like you
in all situations. Now just give them a call and start hanging out.
In any other situation, it might be a good idea to understa nd how
you are perceived and to learn how other people function. I don’t
think I will make headlines by saying that most people you meet
aren’t like you.
Words can have incredible power , but the words we choose and
how we use them vary. As you have seen from the title of this book,
there are different interpretations of—yes, you got it—words. And
when you use the wrong word, well, maybe then you’re an idiot.
S u r r o u n d e d  b y  I d i o t s — o r  N o t ?
What does this actually mean? As I was writing, the following
analogy hit me: Behavior patterns are like a toolbox. All types are
needed. Depending on the occasion, a tool can sometimes be right
and some times be wrong. A thirty-pound sledgehammer is great for
tearing down walls, but it’s hardly the thing if you want to hang a
picture in the foyer .
Some people are opposed to the idea of sorting people into
different behavior types. Maybe you believe that you shouldn’t
categorize people in that way, that it’s wrong to pigeonhole people.
However , everyone does it, perhaps in another way than I do in this
book, but we all register our differences nonetheless. The fact
remains that we are differen t, and in my opinion, pointin g that out
can be someth ing positive if you do it in the right way. Improperly
used, every tool can be harm ful. It’s more about the person using it

[PAGE 17]
than the tool itself. This book is your introduction to human behavior
and dialogue. The rest is up to you.
Parts of what you are going to read I have gathered from TTI
Success Insigh ts. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Sune
Gellberg and Edouard Levit for so generously sharing both their
experience and their training materials.
No Matter How Strange It Might Seem, in Theory,
Every Kind of Behavior Is Normal
N o r m a l  B e h a v i o r  …
… is relatively predictable.
Every person reacts in a habitual manner in similar situations. But
it’s impossible to predict every possible reaction before it
happens.
… is part of a pattern.
We often react in consistent patterns. Therefore, we should
respect one another ’s patterns. And understand our own.
… is changeable.
We should learn to listen, act, speak openly , and reflect in order
to do what is relevant right now . Everyone can adapt.
… can be observed.
We should be able to observe and consider most forms of
behavior witho ut being amateur psychologists. Everyone can take
note of the people around them.
… is understandable.
We should be able to understand why people feel and do what
they do—right now . Everyone can think about why .
… is unique.
Despite the conditions that we have in common, each person’ s
behavior is unique to him. Succeed in your own conditions.
… is excusable.
Dismiss personal jealousy and complaints. Learn to have
tolerance and patience, both with yourself and with others.

[PAGE 18]
2
Why Are We the Way We Are?
Where does our behavior come from? Why are people so different?
Search me! Very briefly , it’s a combination of heredity and
environment. Even before we’re born, the foundations for the
behavior patterns we will exhibit in adulthood have been laid. The
temperament and character traits we have inherited affect our
behavior , a process already begun at the genetic stage. Exactly how
this works is still a bone of contention among scientists, but all are in
agreement that it does come  into play. Not only do we inherit traits
from our own parents but also from their parents—also in varying
degrees from other relatives. At some point or other , we have all
heard that we speak like or look like an uncle or an aunt. As a child, I
resembled my uncle Bertil—something to do with my red hair. To
explain how this is genetically possible would take a tremendous
amount of time. For the moment, let us just establish that this
inheritance lays the foundation for our behavioral development.
What happens once we are born? In most cases, children are
born impulsive, adventurous, without any barriers whatsoever . A
child does exactly what he wants. The child says, “No, I don’t want
to!” or, “Sure I can!” He is immers ed in the thought that he can
manage just about anything  at all. This kind of spontaneous and
sometimes uncontrolled behavior is, of course, not alway s what his
parents wished for. Then, hey presto, what was once an original
pattern of behavior begins to transform, in the best/worst-case
scenario, into a copy of someone else.

[PAGE 19]
How Are Children Influenced?
Children learn and develop in multiple ways, but the most common is
by imitation. A child mimics what he sees around him, the parent of
the same sex often becoming  the model for imitation. (This is clearly
not an exhaus tive study on how the process works, as this book is
not about how we influence our children.)
Core Values
My core values are found deep within me, values so deeply
embedded in my character that it’s almost impossible to change
them. These are the things I learned from my parents as a child or
that I learned in school when I was very young. In my case it was
different variat ions of “study and do well in school” or “fighting is
wrong.” The latter , for example, means that I’ve never laid hands on
another person . I haven’t fought since third grade, and I seem to
recall that I lost then. (She was really strong.)
Another import ant core value is that all people are of equa l worth.
Because my parents demons trated this to me during my childhood, I
know it is deeply wrong to judge a person based on his or her origin,
sex, or color . All of us carry many such core values. We know
instinctively what is right and what is not. No one can take these core
values away from me.
Attitudes and Approaches
The next layer is my attitudes, which are not exactly the same thing
as core values. Attitudes are things I have formed opinions about
based on my own experiences or on conclusions I have drawn from
encounters in the latter part of my schooling, high school, college, or
my first job. Even experiences later on in life can form attitudes.
A relative once told me that she didn’t trust salespeople. She’s
definitely not alone in having  strong feelings about salespeople, but
in her case it resulted in comical practices. She couldn’t buy anything
without returni ng it. A sweater , a sofa, a car—the buyin g process

[PAGE 20]
was endless. Every fact had to be examined and explored. No
matter how much research she did beforehand, she always wanted
to return her purchases afterwards.
Once I had observed the pattern, I asked her why she did this,
and she explained the reasoning behind her attitude: Eighty-five
percent of all salespeople were swindlers. Explaining that I too was a
salesperson had little effect. To this day, I don’t know if I belong to
the 85 percent or if I can count myself among the fortunate 15
percent. The important thing is that an attitude can change. My
relative had probably been badly fooled a number of times and

[PAGE 21]
therefore learned to distrust  salespeople. However , if she had a
number of positive experiences her opinion could change.
T h e  R e s u l t s
Both my core values and my attitudes affect how I choose my
behavior . Together they form my core behavior , the real person I
want to be. My core behavior is how I act in complete  freedom,
without the influence of any external factors at all.
You probably already see the issue here: When are we ever
completely free from external influences? When I discuss this
question with groups of people in different contexts, we all usually
agree: only when we’re sleeping.
But people are different. Some don’t care. They are always
themselves because they’ve never reflected upon how they are
perceived. The stronger your self-understanding is, the greater your
probability of adapting to the people around you.
How Do Others Really Perceive Me?
The people around you most often see your moderated behavior .
You interpret a specific situation and make a choice about how to act
based on that evaluation—this is the behavior that others around you
experience. It’s all about the mask you wear to fit into a given
situation. We all have several different masks. Having one at work
and one at home isn’t that unusual. And another one for visiting the
in-laws, perhaps. This book is not an advanced course in psycholo gy
—but I am content to establish that we interpret situations differently
and act accordingly .
Consciously or subconsciously , surrounding factors cause  me to
choose a particular course of action.
And this is how we act. Look at this formula:
BEHA VIOR = f (P × Sf)
Behavior  is a function of Personality  and Surrounding factors .

[PAGE 22]
Behavior  is that which we can observe.
Personality  is what we try to figure out.
Surrounding factors  are things that we have an influence on.
Conclusion:  We continually affect one another in some form or
other . The trick is to try to figure out what’ s there, under the surface.
And this book is all about behavior .

[PAGE 23]
3
An Introduction to the System
At the end of this book you will find a description of the background
to how the DISA system emerged, but since you probab ly want to
dive into its most interesting elements—how everything works in
practice—you can just read on. Otherwise, you can always go
directly to page 228.

[PAGE 24]
As you can see, there are four main categories of behavior types,
each of which is associated with a color . This book is about how you
can recognize them. Quite soon, as you start reading about the
different colors, various faces  will come to mind. Sometimes, maybe,
even your own.
About 80 percent of all peop le have a combination of two colors
that dominate their behavior . Approximately 5 percent have only one
color that dominates behavio r. The others are dominated by three
colors. Throughout the book I focus on the single colors individually
because they are the fundamental components of a person’ s
behavior . It’s like a recipe—we need to understand all the ingredients
before we bake the cake. Entirely Green behavior , or Green in
combination with one other color , is the most common. The least
common is entirely Red behavior , or Red behavior in combination
with one other color .

[PAGE 25]
Many people you meet possess qualities that you sometimes
wish you had—you may even feel jealous of these people. They
easily master things that you struggle with. Maybe you’d like to be
more decisive like Reds, or maybe you wish it were easier for you to
interact with strangers, like Yellows. Possibly , you wish that you
didn’t stress so much, that you could just take it easy like Greens do,
and perhaps you wish that you could keep your schedule in better
order , something that’ s natural for Blues.

[PAGE 26]
Naturally , it works the other way as well. You are going to read
things that will help you realiz e that you too boss others around a bit
too much, just like Reds tend to do. Or that you talk way too much,
something that Yellows do. It might be that you take things way too
easy, not getting involved in anything, the Greens’ weakness. Or
you’re always suspicious of everything, seeing risks everywhere, just
like Blues. Here you can learn to see your own pitfalls and how you
can take appropriate measures to get around them.
No matter what you learn about yourself and others, take notes,
underline things, and engage with the material.

[PAGE 27]
4
Red Behavior
How to Recognize a Real Alpha and A void Getting in His W ay
What should we do? W e’ll do it my way . Now!
This is the behavior type that Hippocrates in his theory of human
temperament called choleric. Nowadays you might call a Red person
bold, ambitious, driven, but also potentially hot-tempered, rash, or
dominant. You quickly notice a Red person because he doesn’t
make the slightest ef fort to conceal who he is.
A Red person is a dynamic and driven individual. He has goals in
life that others may find difficult to even imagine. Since his goals are
so highly ambitious, achievin g them seems to be impossible. Reds
strive forward, always pushing themselves harder , and they almost
never give up. Their belief in their own ability is unsurpassed. They
carry inside them the firm belief that they can achieve anything—if
they just work hard enough.
People who have lots of Red in their behavior are task-o riented
extroverts and they enjoy challenges. They make quick decisions
and are often comfortable taking the lead and taking risks. A
common perception is that Reds are natural leaders. These are
people who willingly take command and go to the fore. They are so
driven that they will get through despite any obstacle in their path.
Their disposition is ideal in competitive situations. It’s not unusual for
a CEO or a president to have lots of Red in his behavior .
This form of competition is present in everything Reds do. To say
that they constantly want to challenge and compete is probably not

[PAGE 28]
entirely true, but if a chance of winning something arises— why not?
The exact nature of the competition is unimportan t; it’s the
competitive element that keeps Reds running on all cylinders.
Pelle, one of my former neighbors, liked competing so much that
he developed entirely new interests just to compete. I like working in
the garden, and so I spend quite some time doing so. Pelle didn’t like
gardening, but when he had heard people commenting on my
beautiful garde n often enough he finally had enough. He started one
project after another , always with a single but very clear objective: to
outdo me. He confounded his wife by digging new flower beds,
planting a rainbow of unbelievably fabulous plants, and cultivating
the lawn to golf-course standard. The only thing I needed to do to
keep him going was to merely suggest that I would purchase more
plants. Then he would go to the local garden center quicker than you
could say “bad loser .”
You can also recognize Reds by other behavior patterns. Who
talks the loudest? Reds. Who goes all out when explaining
something? Reds. Who’ s always the first to answer a question?
Reds again. Who, during an otherwise pleasant dinner , makes
categorical comments on just about any topic? And who will judge an
entire country based on something he saw on television? Reds!
Something is always happening in the lives of Red people. They
can’t sit still. Idle time is wasted time. Life is short; better get going
immediately . Do you recognize the type? Always on the go. So step
aside; let’ s get cracking!
“Tell Me What You Really Think—Yes, for Real.”
Reds have no problem being blunt. When asked a specific question,
they often say exactly what they think, without any frills. They see no
need to wrap things up in a bunch of empty phrases. When a
thought pops into their heads , everyone knows it immediately . They
have opinions on most things , and they trot their thoughts out quickly
and ef ficiently .

[PAGE 29]
A common remark is that Reds are very honest, because they
dare to express their person al truths to people. They don’t really
understand what the fuss is all about. They’ve only said things as
they are.
If you need someone with extra energy , you may want to invite a
Red into the team or project group. They fight tirelessly along when
others have already given up—if they are determined to succeed,
that is. A task that has become humdrum or meaningles s could be
totally ignored by a Red.
I call this phenomenon slog or split. If the task is important
enough, a Red will go throu gh fire and water to complete it. If he
feels it has no purpose, into the trash it goes.
Can I Win Something? In That Case, I’m In.
So Reds like competing. They appreciate the slight antagonism that
is part of being competitive and the glorious moment of winning.
They even enjoy winning competitions that probably don’t even exist,
except perhaps in their own mind. It can be passing a slow walker on
the street, finding the absolut ely best parking spot, or dominating the
family game of Monopoly—d espite the fact that the purpose of the
game is to entertain the kids and none of the other adults are
actually competing. For a Red, this is all natural because he sees
himself as a winner .

[PAGE 30]
Let me give you an example. I once worked for a company  where
the CEO was Red. He was energetic and efficient—and
consequently incredibly dynamic. No meetings were as short and
sweet as those run by this CEO. But his weak spot was the
competitive element. As a young man he had played soccer , and
every spring at this particular workplace they held a soccer
tournament. It was very popular , even before he joined the company .
Naturally , he had to take part. No other CEO before him had ever
done so, but that wasn’t the problem. The problem was that as soon
as he got out on the field he became a different person. On fire with
his competitive drive, he flattened anyone who stood in his way .
This continued for a few years until someone had the guts to tell
him that he played just a little bit too rough—the game wasn’t
supposed to be that serio us. The CEO didn’t understand. He
grabbed the latest flyer for the game and pointed out that it was
called a soccer “tournament.” Tournaments are competitions, and if
you compete you are in it to win. Simple!
He competed in traffic, on the soccer field, in business. No area
was too insignificant not to become a competition. He even raced to
see how quick ly he could finish reading a book. What others do for
relaxation he transformed into a competition. One hundred pages an
hour was a reasonable pace.
His wife had even banned him from playing a memory card game
with his childre n, who were five and six years old. Since they had
better memories than he did, they won most of the time, and in his
frustration he intimidated them.
Before you conclude that this guy sounds rather unsympathetic,
we need to look at his intentions. This kind of intensive and
competitive behavior often upsets other people because they think it
is all about dominating and suppressing others. Nothing could be
further from the truth. His intentions were almost never malicious. He
just wanted to win.
This is one of the greatest challenges for Reds. It’s not
uncommon that other people feel irritated or intimidated by them

[PAGE 31]
because they’r e such powerful personalities. Later on in this book, I
will share some simple ways that you can deal with these individuals.
Time Is Money
“Quick” is synonymous with “good” for Reds. If you are in a
meeting and suddenly notic e that one of the other participants is
devoting his time to something completely different, it may well be a
Red who has lost interest. If you look closer , you will realize that his
thoughts are elsewhere—on the next step in the process being
discussed, for example. Because Reds are quick thinkers, they
move on long before everyone else.
Few things annoy Reds more than sluggishness. If a meet ing or a
discussion drags on, he may interrupt and ask if it’s really necessary
to prolong the issue. “We’ve already discussed this for twenty
minutes. Get it together! It’s only a few million in investm ents. How
hard can it be?”
If you think about it, they’re often right. When other people may
find it difficult to make a decision, Reds are prepared to make quick
decisions in order to keep things moving. With a Red on the team,
nothing will be discussed ad infinitum. After all, it’s alway s better to
do something rather than nothing, right?
The advantage is obvious. We’re talking about people who never
waste time on anything that doesn’t move forward. As soon as a task
becomes unclear or is taking too long, a Red will ensure that the
momentum is maintained and spur things along. Chop-chop, done in
double time.
About fifteen years ago I began working for a small consulting
company with about a dozen employees. It was a polished
organization with a great spirit of entrepreneurship and excellent
momentum in business dealings. One of the reasons why they were
so efficient was because the founder of the company was a Red.
Nothing could move too quickly for Björn. No meeting took longer
than was absolutely necessary .

[PAGE 32]
In my second or third week in the new job, I was sitting in a traffic
jam when my cell phone rang. I looked at the display and saw that it
was Björn. I answered the way I’d been instructed to when I started
at the company—with a greeting, my name, and the comp any name.
Impatiently he interrupted me and spit out his question.
“Were you looking for me?”
“No,” I replied,  and took a deep breath, ready to say something
else. I didn’t get the chance.
“Okay ,” he said, and hung up.
Eight seconds.
Unpleasant? Well, at the time we didn’t really know each other .
However , I must admit that the whole episode had me worried a little
—at least on that occasion. Only three weeks at the company and
the big chief himself calls, and sounding irritated!
When we’d gotten to know each other—and I learned that Björn
was Red—I asked him why he was so abrupt on the phone. Of
course he didn’t even remember the call, but he said he was
probably just trying to find out if I was looking for him. When he
learned I wasn’t, there was no further need to talk. Wasting time on
polite flowery phrases or drawn-out farewells wasn’t for him.
But at the same time, here was a person with a capacity to work
far more than normal. Björn managed to do more in an average
working day than most people. He still has an exceptional ability to
make the most of any free time. If he has a gap of five minutes in his
schedule he manages to squeeze in an email, a phone call, and go
through some meeting minu tes. From the outside, this may seem
like an unnece ssary pursuit of efficiency . But a Red detests inactivity .
Things must happen. Add to this a sense of constant urgency , and a
great deal will get done.
The Sky’s the Limit. Or Is It?
For a Red, a realistic budget is a budget for cowards. If we don’t
push ourselves  to the breaking point, we haven’t tried hard enough.
Reds love difficult tasks, so their level of ambition is usually

[PAGE 33]
boundless. The ability to manage difficult situations and challenges
is the defining attribute of Red behavior .
When a person with Red traits sets his goals, several things
happen. First, he wants to know how well a specific task under the
most favorable conditions could be performed. If all nineteen
parameters were met and we all gave it a little extra effort the results
would be phenomenal. This means that anything below that
impossible level of excellenc e is boring, because there’ s at least a
remote possibility of that result being achieved.
Nothing is impossible. The impossible just takes a little longer .
More than likely it was a Red who came up with that expression.
Naturally , it’s also about the type of project. It’s not enough just to
set an imposs ible sales budget. If a Red doesn’t like sales, he’ll
ignore the budget. Since he prefers to make all the decisions
himself, he probably won’t be fooled into doing something he doesn’t
feel like doing.  Reds set higher demands on themselves than any of
the other color s would. And they are always prepared to work hard. I
wouldn’t go so far as to say that no other color works as hard as
Reds do, but I would venture  to say that a Red would give anyone a
run for his money .
Ambition, which is intrinsic to Reds, shouldn’t be confused with a
lust for power . Reds have no problem taking positions  of power ,
since they are fearless. Expre ssions like “It’s lonely and windy at the
top” don’t scare them. But for a Red power is not an end in itself. It
does, however , come in handy for those who like to make their own
decisions and avoid having to wait for others.
A Red can, in fact, be quite unassuming. It’s true that he has a
strong ego, but status and prestige don’t have the same importance
as with other colors. The reason is simple: A Red usua lly doesn’t
care what others think. He’s not here for their sake—he’ s here for his
own.
Let Me Tell You How Things Really Are

[PAGE 34]
A Red gives everything he’s got. When he has an opinion about
something or if he wants the rest of us to agree with him, he pulls out
all the stops.
Once, I was in a meeting with a large number of people who
didn’t know one another that well. It was a gathering of consultants
who were meeting to discuss  a potential collaboration. It was in the
middle of a recession, and we were all concerned about the lack of
direction. While we were waiting for the chairperson to arrive, we
chatted a little about everything.
At one end of the table sat Elisabeth, who had strong opinions
about everything. In an unequivocal voice, she suddenly stated that
the company was still expected to earn over $50 millio n a week,
despite the recession. About fifteen consultants, all highly trained,
reflective, and intelligent people, nodded in agreement. Just imagine
—$50 million! Per week!
While Elisabeth expanded on how the situation ough t to be
resolved in the consulting world, I began thinking about the figures a
little bit. Not knowing where these figures came from, I remained
silent. It could be true; it could also be farfetched. I honestly didn’t
know . While waiting for the meeting to begin officially , I started
calculating how much $50 million per week would be per year. I
didn’t have enough paper .
After the meeti ng, I got the answer to my speculations. I was in a
taxi on my way to my next meeting when the driver turned on the
radio. In the news, it was announced that the company in question
was expected to earn between $2 and 2.5 million per week. I
realized that Elisabeth had gotten the information from the news. I
also understoo d that $2 or $2.5 million per week was far more
realistic than the $50 million that she had referred to.
But wait a minute. A little reconciliation with reality is needed
here. Why didn’t anyone react? No one in the room lifted a finger or
called her information into question. Why?
Because she sounded so convincing! Her facial expression was
definite; her countenance was determined, and her voice did not

[PAGE 35]
quiver in the least when she presented her figures.
That’ s the way Reds function. When they believe something, they
let people know that this is the only truth that exists. Now maybe
there are some sticklers for detail who might claim that this is
deceptive, since we now know that the company earned $2.5 million
a week  and not roughly $50 million. But I’m convinced that Elisabeth
really believed  what she said. She had things turned around, no
doubt about that, and she was certainly not interested in details. But
my point is that by sounding utterly confident when she declared that
the company was earning six months’ revenue—per week—we all
fell for it.
Or, in the words of a good friend of mine: There are two ways to
do this—my way and the wrong way .
Only Dead Fish Go with the Flow
Reds are both groundbreakin g and strong willed. Why not also add
“results oriente d” and “decisive” when we’re at it? For Reds, it’s not
sufficient to do things like everyone else does. And just because it’s
tough doesn’t mean we should avoid doing it.
Reds aren’t afraid to make decisions. When everyone else
hesitates, thinking and weighing the risks, a Red makes the
controversial decision. A Red’s determination is usually unyielding.
Once he’ s decided, then it’ s full steam ahead.
Their fearlessn ess dares them to tackle things that make others
hesitate. This is usually evide nt when things get rough, and they are
undaunted by tough choices or tricky decisions. It is no coincidence
that many entrepreneurs are Reds. Setting up new businesses—
especially if they are based on completely new business concepts—
is, in our curre nt economy , not for the faint of heart. It’s not a bad
thing to have a force of nature in the driver ’s seat. It takes a strong
mind to move things forward, someone who understands that risks
that are part of everyday life and that everything boils down to hard
work from morning to night—for many years. Reds understand this
from the beginning and are in no way intimidated by it.

[PAGE 36]
Do you need someone to pursue a problem in your apartment
complex? Maybe you’ve gotten on the wrong side of your landlord,
who says that there is absol utely nothing wrong with your heat. Or
maybe the contractor who repaired the roof and installed the new
elevators was negligent and won’t take responsibility for it. Any time
you try to get things straig htened out, you’ve been brought to
standstill by a barricade of unanswered calls and info@ addresses.
You’re just about to give up when you suddenly rememb er the guy
on the second floor living above you. Isn’t he kind of Red? Wasn’t he
the one who dared to go against the super at the last meeting and
get the trash policy changed? Y es, that’ s the guy!
Throw the guy from the seco nd floor into the process, and then
you’ll see thing s begin to happen. You might have to motivate him a
little, explaining that he has a lot to gain from it himself. But he will
make things happen—he’ll subdue the landlord and get the
contractor in line. And he won’t lose any sleep just because
someone got angry with him in the process.
Generally speaking, a Red’s strengths are very powerful. They
are extremely clear in their communication, and you don’t have to
look far to identify Red behavior . Of course, over the years many
Reds learn to restrain themselves somewhat, but it doesn’t usually
last very long. They’ll be back to full throttle—and all that that entails.
It Wasn’t Better Before. Onward and Upward.
A Red doesn’ t try to stick to his original point of view when he
realizes that a better solution  exists. He is a quick thinker and has no
problem shiftin g his ground at short notice. One of the advantages of
this is that he doesn’t reject other people’ s ideas if he has none
himself. It’s worth looking into anything that can propel development
forward.
Sometimes decisions can come a little bit too quickly , but the will
to constantly change create s a strong dynamism and flexibility . If
anything has been static for a long time—maybe a few weeks—he
will turn things  up a notch. Some people may find this stressful, but

[PAGE 37]
when you ask a Red why he changed something that was actually
working the answer could well be “Because I could.”
Naturally , there are also downsides. Reds get bored with the
status quo quickly and so they change it—the people around them
have no idea what will happen next. When Greens and Blues have
just gotten used to the new organization and think they have finally
grasped how things are supposed to work, well, a Red will have
already outlined the next step.
Conclusions on Red Behavior
So what do you think? Do you know any Reds? Do you have any
around you? If you want to get to know some famous Red people,
consider Steve Jobs, FDR, Venus Williams, or Margaret Thatcher .
There’ s also Barack Obama and Mother T eresa.
Oh yes, it’s true. If you consider Mother Teresa’ s deeds, the
strength she needed and whom she had to deal with—t he world’ s
foremost leaders—to achieve what she did, then you’ll realize that
she was extremely determined and forceful. A typical Red profile.

[PAGE 38]
5
Yellow Behavior
How to Recognize Someone Whose Head Is in the Clouds and Get
Him Back to Reality Again
“That Sounds Fun! Let Me Do It!”
In the Hippocratic world, we have now come to the sanguine
person. What other words can be used to describe him?  Optimistic
and cheerful, a person with a bright outlook on life. The thesaurus
even suggests the epithet a man of possibilities … how about that? It
is, in fact, an excellent description of Yellow behavior . These are
people who live to live, always finding opportunities for enjoyment.
Life is a banqu et, and Yellows will see to it that they savor every bite.
They are driven by merriment and laughter . And why not? The sun is
always shining somewhere.
Do you know anyone who sees sunshine where others see dark
clouds? Have you met anyon e who can laugh even though he hasn’t
had any good news for months? Then you’ve met a Yellow . Have
you been at a party and wondered why everyone flocks  around a
particular person, man or woman? Well, in the center of the circle
there’ s a Yellow , entertaining  anyone who wants to laugh. Yellows
make sure that the atmosphere is at its zenith so that every event
becomes a marvelous party . When something is no longer fun, they
move on to another place where the atmosphere is better .
Recognizing a Yellow is easy. He’s the one who’s talking  all the
time. He’s the one who gives  answers rather than asking questions
—often answe ring questions that no one has even asked. He

[PAGE 39]
answers a question by telling a story that may or may not have
anything to do with the issue. But it really doesn’t matter , because he
will put you in a cheerful mood. Besides, his unshakab ly positive
attitude also makes it impossible for you to feel upset for long.
I would even go so far as to argue that Yellows are more popular
than other colors. How can I say that? Look for yourself. They
entertain, put people in a good mood, and fun things always happen
around them. They know how to capture everyone’ s attention and
how to keep it. They make us feel important. They are just nice to be
around.
They are also very typically touchy-feely people. Like Reds,
Yellows are very willing to make quick decisions, but they can rarely
explain why using rational reasoning. A more likely response would
be, “It just felt right.” And sure, gut feelings shouldn’t be
underestimated. Studies have shown that gut feelings are right more
often than we think. But that’s not the kind of gut feeling we’re talking
about here. Yellows often make decisions that are based on feeling
simply because no thought was ever involved.
I have a sister who is Yellow. Marita is so easygoing in her
manner that I have never heard anyone utter a single negative word
about her. Never . I may be biased, but I have never met anyone who
doesn’t immediately like her. She has an entirely unique ability to
connect with every person she meets.
Marita always has something entertaining to say. However , some
of these  things are so peculia r that I sometimes have to ask her what
she was thinki ng when she said them. With a burst of laughter , she
usually replies, “Thinking? I wasn’t!”
In many ways, it’s liberating when I visit her and her husband,
Leif. Their almost incomprehensible ability to see bright spots in
everything around them is so delightful that it frees my own
easygoing disposition. I am never as happy and exhilarated as when
I visit them. For years, I wondered why this was, and have reached
the conclusion that Y ellow behavior is simply contagious.

[PAGE 40]
If I say to my sister , “It looks like it is going to rain,” she simply
replies, “I can’t imagine that.” Pointing to the window , I say to her,
“But look, it’s actually rainin g. It is quite dark out there; we could
have thunder before this is over.” “Sure,” she says, “but after that the
sun will come out! Just wait and see.” Then she laughs. Again. While
the rain pours outside, she sits on the sofa, unabashedly having fun.
And I, along with everyone else, laugh along because it’s impossible
to resist.
“The More the Merrier! Your Friends Are My Friends.
…”
People with lots of Yellow in their behavior are focused on creating
relationships. They are outgoing and can be extremely persuasive.
They’re enthus iastic, excited, and happy to talk about their feelings
for others and, not infrequently , for complete strangers.
Yellows can talk to anyone. They are not at all shy, perceiving
most people they meet as pleasant. They even see strangers in a
positive light—they’re just friends you haven’t met yet.
Many people notice that Yellows are always smiling and laughing.
That’ s undoubtedly one of a Yellow’ s strengths. Their optimism is
invincible. Comments about how everything is going to hell are often
met by remarks about “What a beautiful view we have!”
Just like Reds, Yellows have lots of energy . They find most things
interesting, and Yellow individuals are the most curious people you’ll
ever meet. Everything new is enjoyable, and a great deal of Yellow
energy is spent finding new ways of doing things
Who gets the most holiday cards, do you think? Yellows. Most
contacts in their cell phone? That’ s right—Y ellows. Most friends on
Facebook? You’re getting the idea—Y ellows. They have friends
absolutely everywhere, and they are excellent at keepin g in touch
with everyone in order to keep up-to-date. Yellows want to know
what’ s going on. They want to be where it’s all happening , and they
will make sure to be at every party .

[PAGE 41]
“Isn’t It Amazing? I Just Loooove It to Bits!”
If there  is anything that characterizes Yellow behavior , it’s unlimited
optimism and enthusiasm. Few things can keep their good mood
away for long. The Yellows’ entire being is concentrated on one thing
—finding opportunities and solutions.
In his day, Hippocrates called Yellows the sanguine ones. This
simply means optimists. Nothing is really a problem. It will all sort
itself out. It’s neither here nor there that the world just happens to be
full of worries and hardships. With their incurably positive outlook on
life, Yellow individuals give joy to the people around them  with their
cheerful acclamations and entertaining jokes.
I don’t know where Yellows get their tremendous energy , but it’s
focused on having fun and devoting themselves to social
togetherness. Everyone must be involved, and a Yellow will not allow
anyone to be gloomy .
Micke, a good friend of mine, is Yellow , and his life has included
more than his fair share of challenges. His wife left him, his children
have had problems at school, and on various occasions his
employers have gone bankrupt and he has lost his job. I can’t even
count how many times he’s had a car accident, his home  has been
burgled, or he has been robbed of expensive items. Sometimes I
hardly dare to answer the phone when I see that Micke is calling. To
tell the truth, Micke is the most jinxed man I have ever met.

[PAGE 42]
But what’s so curious about him is that none of this ever seems to
bother him. Naturally , he’s upset when accidents happen, but he
can’t stay upset for long periods of time. Inside, he just bubbles
along most of the time.
I remem ber one occasion when we were both quite young. He
had just bough t an old Alfa Romeo. It was a two-seate r with two
doors. Painfully rusty , it was nothing short of a miracle that it even
held together . Micke had the car for about a week when he hit a
lamppost and couldn’t get out on the driver ’s side. When I heard
about the accident, I was worried and called to see if he was okay.
His answer? “It was fine! I just got out the other door!”
The Optimistic Consultant Strikes Again
Since Yellow individuals are so positive and cheerful, they spread joy
and warmth to those around them. With their uncontrollable
optimism, they demolish all opposition quite ef fectively .
Who can be upset when there’s someone pointing out the good
things all the time?
How could anyone fail to be inspired by a person who refuses to
see half-empty glasses? Who always sees the positive?
One of my customers is a sales director for a pharma ceutical
company . Marianne worked her way up in the company via what we
call the long route. Her mana gers and coworkers all agree that she’s
been so successful simply due to one thing: her amazing ability to
inspire those around her .
On a number  of occasions, I’ve watched her conduct sales
meetings. I consider myself a decent motivator , but when Marianne
gets going you just have to take your hat off to her. Withi n a couple
of minutes, the room is so inspired if she were to ask the sellers to
jump out the window they’d do it, even though they are on the fifth
floor. She makes everything sound so simple.
“It’s a great idea to jump out the window! We can do this. Let’s
jump!”

[PAGE 43]
And the group jumps after her. With her optimism and bright
outlook on life, she is phenom enal at getting people to achieve great
feats—just by closing their eyes to anything negative. With sheer
inspiration, she can inflate people’ s confidence to incredible levels.
I once saw her dealing with an irate customer who felt mistreated
by her organiz ation. Not a situation most people dream about! It
turned out it wasn’t a problem for Marianne. By just smiling
steadfastly at the customer and refusing to listen to his negative
comments, she moved him from an angry face to a gentle smile and
finally to boisterous laughter . How could that happen? I don’t think
that even she could explain the underlying process. It simply came
naturally to her .
What Happens If We Turn Everything Upside Down?
You won’t find anyone more resourceful than a Yellow . If there is
anything Yellows have an aptitude for, it’s seeing solutions where
others do not. Yellows have the unique ability to twist and turn
things. To put it simply , they turn everything upside down  and think
outside the box. Call it what you want, but their thinki ng doesn’t
always follow any set pattern.
They move quickly: The Yellow’ s intellect is very fast, which
means that it can be difficult to keep up. Sometimes they can even
find it dif ficult to explain their wild ideas.
A good  friend of mine likes to work on his home. Everything
relating to interior design and garden design fascinates him. I
suspect that Robban would secretly rather work in design on a full-
time basis instead of his actual job.
I’ve seen this for myself, but I’ve also heard from his wife how he
goes about things. He walks around the garden, and she starts
counting backw ards from ten. On seven, Robban says, “Honey , I
have an idea.”
There are a few reasons for Robban’ s creativity . It’s easy  for him
to think  in images. He can simply “see” things in front of him long
before they even exist. And he has courage; he’s not afraid to try

[PAGE 44]
new things. Or to talk about them. Usually , his mouth works parallel
to his mind as he discovers these ideas.
I’ve worked with a Yellow who couldn’t even cross the street
without coming up with a few really thought-provoking business
ideas—just by looking around. How does this work? I don’t really
know . For a long time, we asked him to write down his proposals.
You’ll learn more about how a Yellow would react to that kind of
structure when we start talking about weaknesses.
Yellows are also helped by the fact that they rarely have any
limitations. A Yellow dares to go beyond the usual conventions when
he’s in a creati ve mode. Normally , of course, structure and hierarchy
in a business  are a kind of limitation, but Yellows are rarely
concerned about such things. In fact, they often don’t seem to know
that such limitations are there.
Need help with new sugges tions or ideas? Hunt out the most
Yellow person you know . Are you stuck in the same way of thinking?
Do you need a new perspective on an old problem? Speak to a
Yellow . You might not be able to use whatever idea scheme they
come up with—in fact, realis m isn’t a factor for a Yellow—but one
thing can lead to another and then all of a sudden you have
something that works.
Selling Snow to a Penguin
With all their energy and optimism, Yellows are very persuasive. It’s
easy for them to get carried away , seeing opportunities and solutions
where others might only see a dead end.
It’s often said that there is a difference between convincing and
persuading, and many Yellows cross these boundaries. But what
they say sound s so good. With the help of language, they really are
masters at winning over people to their side.
Regarding language: As I describe in the chapter on body
language (page 106), most Yellows have a rich and varied way of
gesticulating, so that they can convince you not just with their words,
but with their entire bodies.

[PAGE 45]
But it’s not just energy and will. Yellows have a unique way of
expressing themselves that sways their listeners. They often use
vivid and color ful imagery when they speak, which appeals to all five
senses and creates an impression that is felt by the whole body .
Without even knowing it, many Yellows are skilled rhetoricians.
They know instinctively that their ethos, the bearer of the message,
is just as important as the message itself. Therefore , they are
mindful of getting through to you as an individual—usually by being
friendly and shaking your hand; making small personal comments;
making you feel important.
Many politicians are phenom enal at this—think of Bill Clinton, for
instance. He has the kind of charisma that is naturally present in
many Yellows— a noticeable interest in another person, the ability to
ask exactly the right questions so that others feel that they are
important.
“I Know Lots of People. All of Them, in Fact.”
If Yellows aren’t allowed to cultivate their relationships, they will
slowly wither and die. Okay , this may be somewhat exaggerated, but
the very definition of Yellow behavior revolves around their ability to
build relationships.
The Yellow traits are inspirational. They inspire those around
them, and the best way to achieve this is through building
relationships. A Yellow knows  that by far the most important factor in
business, for example, is relationships. If your customer doesn’t feel
positively about you, it will be dif ficult to make any headway .
Yellows know everyone. They have more acquaintance s than
everyone else.  They like everyone. A Yellow doesn’t need to know a
person very well before calling him his friend. Anyone who doesn’t
actively dislike  them they consider to be a pal. Remember that when
Reds ask what  is going to be done, Yellows want to know
immediately who will do it. This question is crucial for Yellows. If the
team or group does not function smoothly , a Yellow will not feel well.
He needs functioning relationships for him to come into his own.

[PAGE 46]
Conclusions on Yellow Behavior
What do you think? Have you ever met a real Yellow ? Famous
people who exhibit clear yellow traits include Oprah Winfrey , Robin
Williams, Ellen DeGeneres, and, to take some fictional examples,
Pippin from The Lord of the Rings  and Han Solo from Star W ars.

[PAGE 47]
6
Green Behavior
Why Change Is So Dif ficult and How to Get Around It
“How Are We Going to Do This? It’s Not Urgent,
Right?”
The Green person is the most common. You’ll meet him virtually
everywhere. What’ s the easiest way to explain who he is? Well, I
would like to describe him as being the average of all the other
colors. Please don’t interpret that as something negativ e; keep in
mind what this truly implies. While Reds are stressed performance
seekers, Yellows are creative bon vivant guys, and Blues are
perfectionist Knights of Exce l Spreadsheets (see pages 13 and 14),
Greens are the most balanced. They counterbalance the other more
extreme behav ioral traits in an elegant way. Hippocrates called them
phlegmatic people. The Aztecs called them earth people. Calm,
leisurely , and easygoing are some words that could also describe
them.
It’s just a matte r of stating the facts—not everyone can or should
be extreme; otherwise, we would never get anything done. If
everyone were a driven leader , there would be no one left to be led.
If everyone were an enthusia stic entertainer , there would be no one
to amuse. And if everyon e were a detail-oriented perfectionist, there
wouldn’t be anything to keep in order .
This means that Greens don’t stick out in the same way as others
do and they often lend serenity to a situation. Where Reds and
Yellows start off in top gear, Greens are significantly calmer . And

[PAGE 48]
where Blues get caught up in details, Greens try to feel their way to
what is right.
If you have a friend who is Green, he’ll never forget your birthday .
He won’t begrudge you your successes, and he won’t try to take the
spotlight off you by reeling off his own stories. He won’t try to outdo
you, and he will never pester you with new and drastic demands. Nor
will he see you as a competitor if you were ever placed in that
situation. He won’t take comm and unless he has been told to do so.
And he won’t—
Just a minute please, you might be thinking. That’ s just a lot of
things he doesn’t  do. So what does  he do?
You can’t ignore the fact that Greens are more passive than
others. They’re  not as driven as Reds, not as resourceful as Yellows,
and not as orderly as Blues. This describes most of the population.
For this very reason, they are easy to deal with. They let you be
yourself. They don’t demand much, and they never kick up a fuss
unnecessarily . Children with Green features are usually described as
being little angels. They eat when they’re supposed to; they sleep
when they’re supposed to; they do their homework when they’re
supposed to.
But it’s not just that. Greens will not offend people if they can
avoid it. They’ d rather not offend anyone at all, and they won’t talk
back if the boss makes a strange decision. (At least not to his face,
that is. During the coffee break it may be somewhat different, but
more on that later.) They usually strive to fit in, which makes them
more balanced people. They’re ideal for calming down confused
Yellows, for example. And they’re excellent at warming up Blues,
who, on occasion, can indeed be a tad too cold.
We often hang out with a family where the husband is Yellow and
loves to horse around and take center stage—he come s up with
amusing games and is more than happy to answer any questions
himself. Everyo ne else is his audience, and he never steps  out of the
spotlight. His wife is Green. Calm, composed, and as laid back as
can be. When he jumps around and frolics (these are middle-aged

[PAGE 49]
people), she sits quietly on the sofa and smiles. She’s just as
entertained as everyone else by his antics. When I ask her if she
ever gets tired of her comical husband, she sometimes replies
quietly , “But he’ s having so much fun.”
This is a typica l Green trait. They are very tolerant toward s other
people’ s more singular behavior . Is the picture becoming clearer?
Greens are the people you might not think about—most of us, that is.
Some Simple Basics
Green people are kindness personified. You can expect a helping
hand wheneve r you need it. They are pronounced relational people
who will do everything within their power to save your relationship.
And they will invest lifelong . They will keep track of when your
birthday is, when your partn er’s birthday is, when your children’ s
birthdays are, et cetera. It wouldn’t surprise me if they even know
when your cat first saw the light of day .
It’s often said that Greens are the best listeners, and this is true.
A Gree n will always be more  interested in you than in himself, and if
perchance he should be interested in himself he would never dream
of showing it. You often find Greens in the public sector , where they
help others, with no concern for personal gain.
They are also pronounced team players. The team, the group, the
family , always comes before the individual, and I would even say that
societies consisting of Greens will always take care of the sick and
the weak. They will not leave  a friend in need; you can call them at
any time. They always of fer a shoulder to cry on.
Change isn’t their greatest strength, even though change isn’t
completely foreign to them. If you can simply justify the change and
give him enough time, even  a Green will be prepared to try new
things. But a Green will remind you that you always know what you
have, but you never know what you might end up with. The grass is
not automatically greener on the other side, so to speak.

[PAGE 50]
The Best Pal in the World
As I’ve already said, these are naturally friendly people. When they
tell you that they sincerely care about how you’re doing , you can
trust that they lie awake sleepless for your sake. Just like Yellows,
Greens are relationship peop le and their interest in others is genuine
and authentic.
If you ask a group of people if anyone is prepared to lend a hand
and no one steps up to help, a Green will jump in and shout,
“Choose me!” Why? Because he didn’t want to leave you in the
lurch. He knows that if you don’t get any help you’ll feel bad, and
even though he can be passive, he’s always prepared to help a
friend.
I still remember a young woman I worked with at a consulting firm
years ago. Admittedly , Maja was certainly Blue as well, but above all,
she was Green. Her problem was obvious: When someone asked for
help, she always said yes. Every time.
It was difficult to find her desk due to her workload, but she
organized everything in the end. We could always rely on her
assistance, handling all the things the rest of us had simply forgotten
about. She had a warm and friendly smile, so we asked her to work
in reception and have the first contact with new clients. She never
failed to serve coffee, fix the cushions, or keep track of how long
clients had been waiting.

[PAGE 51]
Maja never forgot anyone’ s birthday or anniversary (or their
wives’ or children’ s, for that matter). She frequently sent short emails
to all of us stressed-out consultants reminding us that we had
families who also needed to be looked after. Sure, we could take
care of our own lives, but in her kindness and thoughtfu lness Maja
went out of her way to help. It was natural for her, and whenever we
asked her to take it easy and take care of herself for a change she
almost felt offended. She wanted to take care of us—it simply made
her feel good. Of course, there were limits, and Maja constantly ran
the risk of someone taking advantage of her huge heart.  But when
properly balanced, this selflessness is a beautiful quality .
Greens do this naturally . When having coffee, it’s quite normal for
you to ask the people with you if they would like a refill. When other
colors would likely take their empty cups to the coffeemaker , Greens
would simply fetch the cof fee carafe and refill everyone’ s cup.
A Green wants to stay on good terms with everyone, so he’ll even
help people he doesn’t really  like that much. Otherwise, there might
be some kind of hullabaloo.
He thinks well of most people and is confident in others’ abilities.
Sometimes he does this so intensely that it ends badly , but normally
that’s the fault of the other person, not the Green himsel f. He is so
good-hearted that now and then others can take advantage of him.
Lasse, a good friend of mine, is a truly genuine friend. It makes
no difference how much he has to do; if anyone needs a helping
hand, Lasse is there, ready to support him. Sometimes, in Lasse’ s
eagerness to help with other people’ s work, he even forge ts to do his
own.
On weekends, he drives his own and others’ children everywhere
they want to go. He helps people move; he lends out his tools
without people even needin g to ask. He listens if you call and
complain about something. This all takes a huge amount of time, but
he enjoys it.

[PAGE 52]
Once They’ve Said They’ll Do Something, You Can
Rest Assured That It Will Be Done
If a Green says that he will do something, you can be confident that
he’ll do it. If it’s in his power to deliver , he will. It won’t be done in the
shortest amou nt of time possible, but it will show up in your in-box
roughly within the expected time frame. Greens don’t want to be
caught failing to deliver , as this might cause trouble for others. And
because they’re good team players, they don’t want to do anything
that can cause  problems for the team. Team comes before self, the
team being the company , crew, football team, or family . For the
Green, it’ s natural to look after everyone else around them.
The reason why everyone works so well with Greens is a topic for
debate. In some situations , it’s simply because they don’t like
conflict. Mostly , however , it’s because they’re controlled by their
desire to make those around  them happy and satisfied. If they can
please you with a job well done, they’ll do it. The desire  to please
others verges on being a driving force for Greens. It comes naturally
and requires no effort. And this selflessness is accompanied by an
exalted serenity that lowers the stress level of those around them.
“We Don’t Want Any Unpleasant Surprises. It’s Good
to Know What’s Going to Happen. Every Time.”
You can always count on a Green person. In some organizations, it’s
a requirement to have reliable employees. Creativity and ingenuity
are not at the top of the wish list: In short, you simply need people
who understand the job and get it done without a lot of fuss or
drama.
Then you hire Greens. They constitute the stable core who will do
the job well. They don’t have problems taking orders—as long as the
orders are formulated in an appealing fashion. Greens enjoy stability
and a certain predictability in the workplace. Or in the home. Or with
the family . Just about everywhere.

[PAGE 53]
Whenever trouble is brewing—maybe due to a recession or when
new managers take over—w e’ll see all kinds of interesting behavior
in a group. Reds, who never listen to the whole message, just rush
off to do what they believe needs to be done. Unless, of course,
they’re busy yelling at the management because they don’t agree
with their decisions. Yellows start wild discussions and inform
absolutely everyone about their take on what happened. Instead of
working, they’ll debate the news until it’s time to leave the office.
Blues will sit at their desks and begin the bureaucratic paperwork,
formulating half a million questions that no one knows the answers to
yet.
Greens? They just murmur . If the management has avoided
seriously sabotaging their sense of security , they’ll trundle on without
complaining. There’ s no point in making a lot of fuss and bother
about it. Might as well keep doing what you were before. This, in
fact, makes things much easier . We’ll get to how we help Greens to
change direction, but they’re great at keeping calm and carrying on.
You’ll always know how a Green will respond to some questions
because he doesn’t change his opinion very often.
A few years ago, I coached Greger . He had been a CEO for
several years, and his management team consisted solely of Green
middle managers. He used to enjoy playing a little game when
launching new ideas. He wrote little notes with the answers he
thought he would get from each person. “No” from Anna. “Yes” from
Stefan. “Maybe” from Bertil.  Right every time! Greger knew them
very well and knew how they would react to his proposals.
This wouldn’t have been the case with Yellows. They don’t even
know how they’re going to respond when opportunities arise.
Exciting—sure, but it’s exhausting for those around them. With
Green associates, however , you don’t need to worry .
“Who? Me? I’m Not Important. Forget That You Even
Saw Me.”

[PAGE 54]
For every Green, the group will always come first. Team before self.
Remember that. This is a fundamental truth for a Green, and it
shouldn’t be challenged too strongly . The working group, the team,
the club, and the family—all these different groups are important for
a Green. He often disregards  his own needs if the group gets what it
needs.
You may think that groups consist of people and if each individual
is satisfied the group as a whole will be content. This might happen,
but then the focus would be individual rather than collective. The way
a Green  sees it, if the group  feels good every individual also feels
good.
Here the Green’ s thoughtfulness becomes apparent—he has
infinite regard for those around him. This is partly the reason why it’s
difficult to get a straight answer from a Green. He’s always trying to
satisfy everyone else.
Let me tell you a rather striking story . One Sunday a few years
ago, a colleague whom I didn’t know that well called me. I had only
been working with Kristof fer for a few months, but I hadn’t really
figured the guy out yet.
So when he called me one Sunday morning I was surprised. I
saw who it was, but I had no idea what he wanted from me. He
greeted me pleasantly and asked what I was doing. I had just bought
a new house at that time and was busy renovating. Kristo ffer asked
what was on the agenda this particular Sunday , and I remember that
I said I was worried about the boiler . It was early winter . The
temperature was just below freezing, and one of the circulation
pumps didn’t really work as it should. Because colder weather was
definitely on the way , I wondered if the pump could cope with a major
cold snap.
Being a Green, Kristof fer asked a number of questions and gave
me lots of good advice. He’d once had a similar boiler , and besides,
he knew a plumber whom he might be able to ask to come by and
have a look—if I was interes ted, of course. Kristof fer and I chatted

[PAGE 55]
for a while, and I became increasingly puzzled about why he had
actually called me.
He asked me where I lived. I gave him the address, and he
promised to write it down and give it to his plumber friend. Then, as a
kind of “by the way,” he asked me if I had any plans to go into town
that day. I lived about twent y-five miles from the office and hadn’t
intended to go to work that Sunday . I explained this to Kristof fer.
We chatted a little while longer, and in the end I finally asked him
straight out what he really wanted. Then he revealed that he was
standing outside the office in his T-shirt because he had accidentally
locked himself  out when he had popped out to fetch some lunch. I
looked at the thermometer . Thirty degrees with light snow. We’d
been talking for about fifteen minutes! I got into the car and saved
him from freezing to the bone.
Everyone else is more important. A Green never asks for
anything.
“I Know Exactly What You Mean.”
They say Greens are introverts, that is, that they’re active in their
inner world. This means that they don’t talk just for the sake of
talking. When you are quieter than those around you, it’s natural that
you listen. And Greens will listen. They are interested in you and
your ideas.
Unlike Reds, who only listen when there is something to be
gained from it, or Yellows, who usually don’t listen at all (although
they will normally deny this fact), Greens hear what you’re actually
saying. They have a genuine ear for human problems. They might
not offer any suggestions or solutions, but they understand what
you’ve told them. Don’t assum e that means that they agree with you
—but they are good listeners.
So far, you have probably tried to puzzle all the pieces together .
Where do the different colors fit in? What kind of job would be best
for each  of them? These are good questions, even if there are no
simple answers. One observ ation that often arises when I work with

[PAGE 56]
these issues in different organizations is that Reds, and Yellows in
particular , must be good at retail and selling. This is true for sure. But
Greens are often overlooked. We always teach salespeople to talk
less and listen more, something Greens already do quite naturally .
Helena was a seller I coached a few years ago. She was Green
and very gentle in her ways. Most people didn’t understan d how she
survived in that daunting industry. But I have a theory . She once told
me about a time when she met a tough chief executive everyone had
tremendous respect for. No one in the entire company had managed
to sell anything to him, but after a little coaching from me Helena was
determined to have a go. So she arranged a meeting.
They ran into each other in the parking lot at the restauran t where
they were to meet for lunch. The stern executive cruised into the lot
in a vintage car from the late sixties. Beautiful, shiny , and obviously
very special. Helena said the only thing she could think of: W ow!
“Do you like cars?” asked the executive, before they had even
greeted each other . Helena nodded. Then he told her about the car,
how much he had spent to restore it, the paintwork and alloys, the
engine. He showed her what it looked like under the hood. Helena
nodded and murmured approval and hoped he wouldn’t ask her any
questions, since she couldn’t tell the difference between a Ford and
a Chev rolet. But she didn’t interrupt; she just listened. After that it
was easy. They sat down, and he asked to see the sales agreement.
How did she do it? By doing nothing at all except for one thing—
listening. He signed before the food was even served.
Conclusions on Green Behavior
Okay . Do you have any Greens in your family? Highly likely .
Mr. Rogers, Gandhi, Michelle Obama, and Jimmy Carter are
some well-known people with elements of Green. And, yes, Jesus.
There’ s a guy who knew how to help others.

[PAGE 57]
7
Blue Behavior
In Pursuit of Perfection
“Why Are We Doing This? What’s the Science
Behind It?”
The last of the four colors is an interesting fellow . You’ve probably
met him. He doesn’t make a fuss about himself, but he does keep
tabs on what is happening around him. While a Green will just go
with the flow, a Blue has all the right answers. In the background, he
analyzes: classifies, evaluates, assesses.
You know you’ve met a Blue if you visit someone’ s home and
everything is organized in a particular way. Clear labels and names
on each hook so that the children will know exactly where to hang up
their jackets. Dinner menus, divided into six-week intervals  to ensure
a balanced diet, stuck on the refrigerator door. If you look at his
tools, you’ll find that everythin g has its own spot and nothing is out of
place. Why? A Blue DIY guy always puts things back where they
belong.
He is also a pessimist, sorry : a realist. He sees errors, and he
sees risks. He’s the melancholic who closes the circle of behavior .
Reserved, analytical, and detail-oriented are some words you might
associate with a Blue.
“Excuse Me, but That’s Not Quite Accurate.”

[PAGE 58]
We all have a friend like that. Think about it: You’re sitting in a
restaurant with your friends. You’re discussing cats, football, or
space rockets.  Someone throws out a random comment.  It may be
your Red friend  who claims that the Patriots have been to the Super
Bowl eleven times; it can be the Yellow who cheerfully claims that as
a child he lived in the same block as Will Smith in W est Philly .
Your Blue buddy clears his throat and in a gentle voice says that
the Patriots have actually only been to the Super Bowl ten times—
with their first appearance after the 1985 season and eight times
since 2001—and that Will Smith actually grew up in Wynnefield,
which is well north of the block in question and a half-hour walk from
the lovely Cent ennial Arboret um. In addition, without blinking an eye,
the good friend  adds, “It’s interesting to note that in the Super Bowl
pregame coin toss, of the past fifty-one games, the outcome has
been tails twenty-seven times and heads twenty-four times. And
based on past statistics, the winner of the coin toss is slightly less
likely to win the game overall.”
You just have to give up, boys. This guy simply knows everything.
He doesn’t make a big deal about it, but his way of prese nting facts
makes it difficult for you to call them into question. He knows where
he found the info and can go fetch the book to prove it.
That’ s the way it is with Blues. They know how thing s stand
before they open their mout h. They’ve Googled, read the owner ’s
manual, and checked the dictionary—and afterwards they present a
report in full.
But an important thing to note: If the question doesn’t come up,
it’s unlikely that your Blue buddy will say anything on the subject. He
has no need to tell everyone about what he knows. Of course, a Blue
doesn’t know everything; no one can. But you can usual ly bank on
the fact that what he says is correct.

[PAGE 59]
Did you notice anything about the art above? Of course you did.
This time I listed the different characteristics in alphabetic al order—
something a Blue would certa inly appreciate. However , I might get in
trouble because I don’t discuss each and every one one of these
characteristics individually on the subsequent pages. To all Blue
individuals who are reading this—who have probably jotted down a
little note in the margin to go to my website to look for possible
explanations for this blunder—I just want to say that I didn’t mean to
cause any strife.
“It’s Not a Big Deal—I Was Just Doing My Job.”
How can a know-it-all be unassuming? It’s impressively modest to
avoid making a fuss, even if you know everything.
It’s rare that a wholly Blue person would feel the need to stand on
the rooftops or to toot his own horn in order to make it clear to the
world who the real expert is. It’s usually sufficient that you, the Blue,
are clear about who knows best.
There are downsides to this modesty . More than once I’ve stood
in the middle of a crowd of people as we all tried to puzzle  through a
problem togeth er. On one such occasion, a Blue came forward after
two hours and casually pointed out the answer . For him, it was never
really a problem at all. He knew a thing or two, but beca use Blues
often miss the big picture, they don’t always act immediately . I asked

[PAGE 60]
him why he didn’t say anything two hours earlier . And, like a typical
Blue, he said, “W ell, you never asked.”
It would be easy to feel aggravated by such a comment. But at
the same time,  I understood him. It’s more my problem than his that
he wasn’t invited to join the discussion. He knew that he knew the
answer , and that was good enough.
There’ s also no need to cheer, applaud, or call a Blue up to the
podium when he’s done something tremendous in an amazing way.
Sure, it doesn’ t really do any harm to cheer . He’ll just nod, accept the
praise and the prize check, and then return to his desk, where he’ll
continue worki ng on the next project. But he may well wonder what
the fuss was really all about—he was only doing his job.
“Excuse Me, but Where Did You Read That? And
What Edition Was It?”
A Blue can rarely get too many facts or have too many pages of fine
print. People say that God is in the details, and I can imagine that it
was a Blue who first said that.
No detail is too small to be noticed. Cutting corners is simply not
an option for a Blue.
“Hold up,” you might say. “Not keeping track of every single tiny
detail isn’t really the same thing as cutting corners.” But if you ask a
Blue it is. “Not having full control is the same thing as not having any
control at all. What do we get by cutting corners? How can you
possibly justify it?”
It doesn’t work like that. Tell a Blue that he can ignore the details
of the new contract and skip the last thirty paragraph s—there’ s
nothing important in that bit—and he’ll stare at you very attentively
and wonder about your mental capabilities. As usual,  he won’t
necessarily say anything. He’ll just completely ignore what you said.
He would rather burn the midnight oil checking all the facts of the
case than miss the slightest detail.

[PAGE 61]
A few years ago, I tried to sell a leadership program to the CEO
of a company in the packaging industry . He was Blue; there was no
doubting that. His emails were long-winded and a little dry, and for
our first meeting he had set aside fifty minutes. Not an hour, not
three-quarters of an hour, but fifty minutes. (There was a reason for
this: After the meeting he would have lunch, and the dining room
was eight minutes away . Plus a visit to the gents for about two
minutes. A fifty-minute meeting would get him there right in time.)
The first time we met, he deposited me in a specific chair by a
specific corne r at the visito rs’ desk. He didn’t ask if I had any
difficulty getting there—which I did; the address was totally
impossible—he offered neither coffee nor tea. He didn’t smile when
he greeted me. He examined my business card very carefully .
After going through the company’ s needs, I explained that I would
go back to my office to put a quote together . Once back at my desk, I
brooded abou t how I should go about it. Normally , my proposals
were ten to twelve pages long, but I knew that wouldn’t be sufficient
in this case. Instead, I put my nose to the grindstone and wrote over
thirty-five pages.
I mailed a hard copy of the quote to him, since for a Blue the
written and printed word means much more than the spoken—or
digital. After a week or so, I followed the whole thing up with a phone
call. They were interesting ideas, the CEO said, but he was ready to
go further. Could he now get the full quote? What he actually said
was:
“ I S  T H E R E  A N Y  M O R E  M A T E R I A L ? ”
I remem ber scratching my head. In my opinion, I had described
the program rather well in the proposal. Each stage had an agenda,
a clear goal, and a defined  purpose. I’d given some background
information, references, and citations.
As a seller , you can’t give up, so I was back at it, addin g every
detail I could think of. The second time, I put together at least eighty-
five pages: each item broken down into two-hour intervals, even

[PAGE 62]
more background, sample exercises, analysis tools, templates, the
works. Details on a level that would have made a Y ellow throw up.
Pleased with myself, I sent over the whole caboodle.
It took several weeks before I heard from the CEO. I asked if he
was ready to make a decision and he asked:
“ I S  T H E R E  M O R E  M A T E R I A L ? ”
Well, this time he wanted to come to my office. For ninety
minutes, we sat on the same side of the table in the conference
room at my office and went through … the table of contents in the
proposal. He had drawn up the general terms and conditions (read:
the fine print) on legal paper , and each section was full of questions
and notes. Afterwards, he said with a totally expressionless face that
it was the best meeting he had been at for a long time. But what he
really wondered was:
“ I S  T H E R E  A N Y  M O R E  M A T E R I A L ? ”
I sent him off and sat down for a while and pondered . More
material? No problem. I shared the whole training folder (this was
before e-learning and virtual classrooms), at least three hundred
pages covering every fifteen-minute session during the fifteen days
of training in five dif ferent stages of leadership.
This was all the material there was, even with information about
when coffee breaks should be slotted in, exactly what  questions
should be asked of the individuals during training, how the room
should be furnished, the works. I can certify—there were no gaps.
I thought that if I took all this and rammed it down his throat he
would be satisfied at last.
After a month, he asked if there was any more material.
There was not.
A comm on misconception is that Blues are unable to make
decisions, but that’s not the case. It wasn’t that this CEO was
pushing the decision into sometime in the future or that he couldn’t
decide. He simply had no need to decide. For him, the process

[PAGE 63]
leading up to the decision was significantly more interesting. And he
just wondered if there was any more material.
Why Some People Have to Sleep on Things for So
Long You Wonder If They’ve Gone into Hibernation
The precedin g example also illustrates another important
characteristic Blue behavior . They’re generally very cautious. They
often think safety first. Where a Red or Yellow would take a wild
chance, a Blue will hold off and consider everything one more time.
There may be more factors to take into account, right? You need to
get to the bottom of things before you act.
This can manifest itself in various ways. It’s a fact that for the
Blue, the trip is more impo rtant than the destination, exactly the
opposite of a Red. Obviously , this amount of caution can result in no
decisions being  made at all, and it also means that Blues rarely take
any major risks. Never taking  any risks ensures a predicta ble life; we
can probably agree on that. I’m not saying anything about how
exciting and inspiring it would be; I’m just stating the facts.
Sometimes a Blue can even completely refrain from starting
something because he can’t assess the risks. I once met a Blue
seller who had trained as an engineer . His motto was that the best
deal is often the one you didn’t make. Risk assessment is a complex
thing, and who knows what dangers are lurking out there? A Blue
generally solves everything by creating advanced systems that
manage the possible risks that may arise. They set three alarm
clocks. They leave two hours early when one would be enough.
They check and recheck the children’ s backpacks before  school in
the morning, even though they packed them the night before and no
one has touched the backpacks during the night. They triple-check
that the keys are in their pocket and, of course, they are. Where else
would they be?
The benefits of this are evident. Blues won’t be taken aback by
unexpected events in the same way others would be. And in the long

[PAGE 64]
run, they save a lot of time.
“It Doesn’t Matter If It’s Easier. It’s Still Not Right.”
Things can’t be allowed to go wrong. That’ s all there is to it. Quality
is all that matters. When a Blue individual thinks his work runs the
risk of being shoddy or low quality , things come to a standstill.
Everything must be checked out. Why has the quality declined?
Running the risk of generalizing, I would say that a fair number of
engineers have distinct Blue traits. Accurate, system atic, fact
oriented, and quality conscio us. I can’t know for certain, but I would
imagine that Toyota, the Japanese car manufacturer , probably has a
good proportion of Blue engineers among its employees. They have
a policy that you must always ask “why” five times to ensure quality
and get to the heart of the issue. I would say that this is a typical
Blue approach (in addition to the Japanese mentality , which is very
long term and rather Blue in expression).
So let’s say someone discovers an oil stain on the floor. A Red
approach migh t be to lambast the person closest to him and then
order him to mop up the stain. A Yellow sees the stain and then
forgets it but two days later is surprised when he slips on it. The
Green also sees the stain and feels a little bit of guilt because it
poses a problem and everyone is ignoring it.
A Blue would ask, “Why is there an oil spill?” The answer may be
that a gasket is leaking. This answer , of course, is unsatisfactory for
a Blue. “Why is the gasket leaking?” “Because it’ s poor quality .” “Why
do we have poor-quality gaskets in our factory?” “Because the
purchasing department was told to save money . We bought cheap
gaskets instead of tight-seale d gaskets.” “But who asked us to save
money and compromise on quality?” This is the way he goes on.
Maybe the problem will resolve itself. Maybe we’ll get a report of
what went wrong, but nothing is done to fix the problem.
In the end, the Blue solution might be to review our purchasing
strategies instead of just mopping up the oil on the floor .

[PAGE 65]
My point is this: A Blue is prepared to dive deep to get everything
exactly 100 percent correct.
Blues argue that if they’re going to do something, they must do it
correctly . And vice versa—if a task isn’t worth being done properly ,
then it’s not worth doing at all. Furthermore, because Blues usually
find it difficult to lie, they will always point out the defects they
uncover—even defects that may reflect poorly on them.
I clearly  remember discussio ns my parents had when I was a
child. We moved from time to time, and usually our house  had to be
sold, with everything that entailed. Dad—the engineer—would, of
course, do all the work himself, and he managed the viewings
personally .
My mum was always upset that he began each viewing by
pointing out all the flaws and shortcomings of the house. It leaked
here and there , and some paint had flaked off behind the sofa. “Why
are you telling them that?” my mother wondered. “Becaus e this and
that is wrong,” Dad replied. “Sure, but do you have to tell that to the
prospective buyers? Now they may never want to buy the house!”
He didn’t understand the problem. As a very honorable and
honest person, he couldn’t hide the faults he knew were there. He
could live with the fact that we rarely made a huge profit on those
deals. He’d been honest about the house, because that’s how it
should be done.
“If the Trail Doesn’t Match the Map, There’s
Something Wrong with the Trail.”
Logical and rational thinking is critical to a Blue. Out with all the
feelings (as much as possible) and in with logic. Of course, Blues
can’t turn off their feelings completely—no one can—but they like to
say they use rational arguments when making decisions. They value
logical thinking highly , but they can very easily become depressed
when things don’t go their way. And depression has nothing to do
with logic and everything to do with feelings.

[PAGE 66]
Few people can repeat the same task an infinite number of times
in exact ly the same way like Blues can. They have a unique ability to
precisely follow instructions to the letter without questioning,
provided they understood and approved of it in the beginning.
How do they do this without getting bored or careless? Well, it’s
logical. If a particular method works, why change it? While a Yellow
or Red would find new ways of doing something simply because they
were bored, a Blue repeats the same thing time and time again.
Consider how a Blue would put together a piece of furniture from
IKEA. If there’ s a manual, then of course you have to read it
thoroughly before you start. Reds, confident that they can easily do
this, start screwing and putting together the various parts without
even looking to see what’ s in the rest of the box. Yellows tear up
everything, exclaiming that it’s going to be great fun to get the
furniture in place. They live in the future and can already see a clear
picture of the new cabinet on the right wall of the bedroom with
Grandma’ s tablecloth and a lovely vase of tulips on it. They put each
part together a little bit haphazardly , without much effort. They’ll
screw in a few screws where it looks logical only to skip to another
part of the cabinet. A Green DIY guy leans the enormous box
against the wall and has a cof fee break. There really isn’t a hurry .
What does a Blue do? He reads the instructions twice, examines
what everythin g looks like, and confirms that the different pieces of
the new cabinet match the pictures in the instructions. With a slightly
damp—not too wet—cloth, he carefully wipes down all the different
parts because they are likely to be dusty . He tallies the number of
screws in the box so that he will not be surprised at the end if
anything is missing (and if there are any parts left over, he may very
well take the whole thing apart again).
It may take a little extra time for a Blue to put together his cabinet,
but once it’ s done, you can be sure that it will stand forever .
“The Devil Is in the Details.”

[PAGE 67]
A few years ago, I wanted to renovate the patio in my yard. Because
I like working with my hands, in contrast to just talking each day, I
thought I would do the job myself. Or at least part of it. My dad, well
over seventy at the time, was going to help out becaus e he knew
that I was pressed for time.
Easier said than done. To provide a sturdy foundation, we were
going to lay down gravel. Dad arrived a few moments before the
dump truck with all the gravel. He had his own wheelbarrow with
him, specially designed to maneuver gravel, and a special shovel
that he always used for simila r purposes. He didn’t understand why I
was standing there with my regular shovel. Everyone knew that you
had to use special shovels for things like this.
The truck came and dropped a hefty pile of gravel in the
drive way. I imagine d a few days of shoveling before me, and to be
honest, it made me feel a little tired. But I was still ready to take on
the challenge.
My old dad? He picked up a bit of gravel between his fingers,
smelled it, felt it, and assess ed its quality . After grunting somewhat,
which I interpreted as approval, he began to assess the pile itself.
He measured the height of the mound with his hand; he paced
how large the circumference  was. I asked him what he was doing.
He didn’t answer but mumbled numbers under his breath.
“One and eighty high, five meters in circumference, gradient …
hmm … “After thirty seconds, he said that there were between 8.75
and 9.25 cubic meters of gravel in the driveway . I confided to him
that it was actually nine cubic meters. Exactly .
Dad asked rather skepticall y how I knew that. I pointed. “It’s
written on the truck,” I said.
Dad was mildly impressed. I asked if he wanted to count each
piece of gravel individually . He didn’t deem that to be necessary .
For hours, he walked around the site and packed and pressed,
raked the gravel, smoothing everything until he thought that
everything was in order . He used a level, plumb line, water , all the
means at his disposal, so that nothing would go wrong.

[PAGE 68]
The gravel needed to be laid at an incline of exactly one
centimeter per meter . Why, you ask? “It says so in the book.”
Because he was a construction engineer , he knew the book by heart.
One centimeter per meter . Exactly . Who knows what terrible
consequences could result if you were careless about that?
Consider the difference between one centimeter and roughly one
centimeter . The former is precise; the latter is imprecise. Roughly
one centimeter—it could be up two centimeters if things went bad.
From a one-centimeter to a two-centimeter gradient—that’ s a
difference of no less than 100 percent, a huge deviation!
(The funny thing about this story is not really the event itself, but
what happened when Dad read about it in the first edition of this
book. He argued that that’s not how it really happened. He corrected
the story on several points and claimed that the truck  had held
twelve cubic meters—not nine. He also insists that he’s not purely
Blue, and there might just be something in that.)
He’s like that with everything . At home, if there are any technical
questions about a television, a car, a microwave oven, or a cell
phone, out comes the manual. He always replies, “It says here
that… Why do you think they wrote this stuff if it’s not meant to be
done that way?”
How do you reply to that? How do you argue with the instruction
manual? It’s impossible to find arguments that a true Blue will
accept. (My dad will also stop at a red light in the middle of the night,
even if he is the only one within a ten-mile radius. Because that’s the
way you do it.)
The great value of this approach is obvious. He will never be
fooled; he will always get what he paid for. It gives him an inner
peace because he knows he has checked everything  out very
accurately .
If you know any Blues, I am sure you will agree with me. Under
normal circumstances, they’re very calm and balanced . Probably
because they keep tabs on everything.

[PAGE 69]
“Silence Is Golden.”
Introvert. Enough said. I could stop there. Many Blues I’ve met don’t
say a single word unnecessarily . That’ s just the way it is. Does that
mean they have nothing to say? Don’t they have opinions about
things? Not at all, they are just very, very introverted. Blues are the
calm, stable individuals the Aztecs equated with the sea, the element
of water .
Quiet on the outside, but under the surface anything could be
happening. “Introv erted” doesn’t mean silent; it means active in the
inner world. But the ef fect of this is often quiet.
In general, my advice is to listen attentively when Blues do
actually talk, because they’ve usually thought through what they say .
So why are they so silent? Among other things, it’s becau se they,
unlike Yellows, don’t feel the need to be heard. Sitting in a corner
and not being seen or heard makes no difference to them. They are
observers, spectators, more than central characters. They can find
themselves at the edge of a group where they observe and record
everything that is said.
And don’t forget this: According to a Blue’ s values, being silent is
something positive. If you have nothing to say—keep quiet.
Conclusions on Blue Behavior
Do you know everything about Blues? Have you identified some
Blues in your life? Bill Gate s and Albert Einstein both used their
attention to detail and meticulous nature to build their success. We
also have Sandra Day O’Connor and Condoleezza Rice. And of
course, from the fictional world, Mr. Spock from Star Trek is the
perfect Blue— all logic, rationality , and intellect, even if a few of the
jokes slip past him.

[PAGE 70]
8
No One Is Completely Perfect
Strengths and W eaknesses
As the title of this book suggests, there are individuals around us
who, under less favorable circumstances, we may find challenging to
understand. There are others  we don’t understand at all, no matter
what the situation is. And the most difficult to interact with are those
who aren’t like us, because they obviously behave “incorrectly .”
The Differences Begin to Become Clear
You can see the general differences among the different colors. The
illustration on page 63 show s an example of how they differ. Some
people are issue oriented, and others are relation oriented. While
two of them (Red and Yellow)  are quick to act, the Greens and Blues
are reflective. This is often the source of everyday
misunderstandings, both large and small. I will come back to this on
page 193, but I would like to take this opportunity to provide some
nuances to the illustration of the different core behavior patterns that
each color represents.
I’m not saying  that you would call people idiots, like Sture, who
opened my eyes at the beginning of this book. Howe ver, in all
honesty, all of us, on occasion, have just stood there, unable to
comprehend a comment we’ve heard or watched someone behave
in way that is diametrically opposed to how we would have  behaved.
And so we believe that they’re idiots.

[PAGE 71]
This reasoning assumes that “I am always right,” which of course
means that the other person, and their form of behavior , is
automatically wrong. It’s a tricky question. A wise person once said
that “just beca use you’re right, I don’t have to be wrong.” We also
tend to pay special attention to the faults and shortcomings of others.
Child psychologists have argued that the things we find most
shocking in the behavior of our children are the things we recognize
in ourselves—but wish we didn’t do. So who decides what kind of
behavior is right and wrong?
Time for a Real Cliché
On the one hand, no one is perfect. There you go, a real platitude.
But really , there are no perfect human beings; no one is without
faults or shortcomings. In my youth, I was constantly looking for a
role model who could become my mentor in life—that person, a man
or woman, completely free from shortcomings—but I never found
one. I still haven’t seen any trace of this elusive perfect human. And,
of course, that’s the way it is. We live with our shortcomings and
make the best of things.
On the other hand, when we think someone is an idiot is it really
because of their faults and shortcomings or have we failed to
understand them? An attribut e that may be useful in some situations

[PAGE 72]
is unsuitable in others. It’s important to remember that
communication usually takes place on the recipient’ s terms.
Whatever people’ s judgment of me may be, that is the way they
perceive me. Regardless of what I really meant or intended. As
always, it’s all about self-awareness. Good qualities can become
drawbacks in the wrong circumstances, no matter what the quality is.
Quick Review of Core Behavior Patterns
Reds  are quick and more than happy to take command if needed.
They make things happen. However , when they get going, they
become control freaks and can be hopeless to deal with. And they
repeatedly trample on people’ s toes.
Y ellows  can be amusin g, creative, and elevate the mood regardle ss
of who they’re with. However , when they are given unlimited space,
they will consume all the oxygen in the room, they won’t allow
anyone into a conversation, and their stories will reflect reality less
and less.
The friendly Greens  are easy to hang out with because they are so
pleasant and genuinely care for others. Unfortunately , they can be
too wishy-washy and unclear . Anyone who never takes a stand
eventually becomes difficult to handle. You don’t know where they
really stand, and indecision kills the energy in other people.
The analytical Blues  are calm, levelheaded, and think before they
speak. Their ability to keep a cool head is undoubtedly an enviable
quality for all who aren’t capable of doing that. However , Blues’
critical thinking can easily turn to suspicion and questioning those
around them. Everything can become suspect and sinister .
In the following sections, I deal with how people might perceive
the weaknesse s of certain behavior patterns. Naturally , this is a
sensitive area and can be easily misunderstood. When I coach
individuals, this is usually where things can get messy . So as you

[PAGE 73]
read on be aware that much is in the eye of the beholder . Who is
right and who is wrong? The behavior patterns I am talking about are
described as other people may perceive them, even if the intention
of the person who just made a fool of himself might have been
completely dif ferent.
One thing I know for sure regarding the different colors  is that
each color evaluates themselves in different ways. Reds and Yellows
tend to inflate their streng ths and believe that they have no
weaknesses. They have powerful egos, and a great part of their
success can probably be attributed to the fact that they don’t get
bogged down  in faults and shortcomings but instead  look for
opportunities and good news. Clearly , this can’t be maintained over
time.
Conversely , Greens and Blues usually exaggerate their
weaknesses and in certain cases even ignore their strengths. The
consequences are clear . When you give positive feedback to a
Green or a Blue, they sometimes appear to be immune  to it and
change the subject to something that went seriously wrong.
Obviously , this is highly unproductive.
Well—are we ready to go?
How Red People Are Perceived
If you ask other people about Reds, you might get a different picture
from the one the Red gives of himself. What a surprise! My own
private researc h shows that Reds are surrounded by more idiots
than the rest of us. Many people will agree with what you have read
up to now about Reds, but I have also heard other comments.
Usually , they express this when the Red is not in the room  because
they are afraid of his fiery temper . You’ve heard him say that he
wants to hear the truth. Over the years, he’s bellowed into our ears
“Say what you think!” But as soon as you do, you find yourself in the
middle of a heated discussion with an angry Red. This means that
what you are going to read now will often be completely new for

[PAGE 74]
many Reds. Not many of us have ever been able to make these
points to a Red before. It takes way too much energy .
Some people say that Reds are just belligerent, arrogant, and
egotistical. They are perceive d as unyielding, impatient, aggressive,
and controlling.
I don’t think this is necessarily correct, but I’ve even heard people
speak about people with Red behavior as dictatorial and tyrannical.
Suddenly the picture isn’t as flattering. The born leader reveals his
blemished side.
First of all, let me say this: Nothing said previously would
necessarily bother a Red, because he is more task oriented than
relationship oriented. Besides , everyone else is wrong. But let’s see
what everyone else has to say .
“ W h y  D o e s  E v e r y t h i n g  T a k e  S o  L o n g ?  C a n ’ t  Y o u  S p e e d  T h i n g s  U p  a  B i t ? ”
Well, what can you say? A person willing to step outside any
regulatory framework to get ahead is nothing if not impatient. When
the usual official channels take too long, a Red will scale over a few
levels of decision makers and expeditiously look for the person who
really calls the shots.
The first example that comes to mind was the traffic in my
beautiful capita l city. Sure, many locals are in more of a hurry than
the national average when they sit behind the wheel—there are
statistics about this. But since we’re talking about Red behavior , I’d
like to tell you about a collea gue I had a few years ago. Björn and I
used a car as our principal means of transport in and around the city.
It simply took too long to use public transport. Björn lost his license
every so often because of his somewhat liberal approach to speed
limits.
He lived far outside the city, and the journey into the office, about
twenty miles away , could take about forty minutes. That was on a
good day; it could just as easily take an hour and a half.
Björn rarely felt the need to adjust his driving according to the
flow of traffic. His opinion was that there was no reason for him to
follow every single traffic rule. The posted speed limits here and

[PAGE 75]
there—fifty , sixty, and so on—they were mostly recommendations.
They didn’t apply to him. They were there for people who didn’t really
know how to drive a car!
On one occasi on I was sitting in the office with a few colleagues
having a cup of coffee, discussing the rather serious traffic situation.
It felt as if the city was on the verge of a traffic infarction. Björn didn’t
know what we were talking about. He wasn’t aware of the problem at
all. On the contrary , he felt that the traffic hadn’t been bad lately .
When we questioned him a bit more, it turned out that he usually
drove in the bus lane. All the way. For over twenty miles. It was so
much quicker that way. Björn even maintained that this was okay.
You could even  get a permit for the bus lane. That’ s what he did, and
it cost him about $140 a month.
About every four weeks the police stopped him, but it was worth
it. Just imagine how much time he saved! And all it cost him was the
fines. He felt it was a good deal.
This story illustrates quite clearly how Red behavior works. They
know just as well as everyon e else that it’s wrong to break the rules;
however , since it’s quicker that way, they do it anyway . Reds are
notorious rule breakers. Once again, I would like to remind you of
their intentions—to get the job done.
Reds have no problem taking  one or two shortcuts, as long as it’s
about getting things done. With such a generous approach to
regulations and rules, you’ll definitely arrive faster . I would even say
that a Red is often so fast that if something were to go wrong he
would still manage to redo the project. At the same time, no one else
ever really knows what’ s going to happen.
“ I  A m  N o t  S c r e a m i n g ! I ’ m  N o t  A n g r y !  A a a r r r g h h h h ! ”
Because the way Reds communicate is so blunt and so direct,
many perceive them as aggressive. This is logical, but at the same
time this perception varies, depending on who becomes the victim of
the Red’s forceful points of view. For instance, in Swed en it’s not
acceptable to behave in the kind of confrontational manner that
would be fine in Germany or France. I’m not saying that people

[PAGE 76]
quarrel more in these countri es, but that they have a slightly different
approach to conflicts.
Just imagine. In many workplaces people are encourage d to be
candid and “have open communication.” What does this really
mean? It’s easy to interpret it as meaning we should all be honest
with one another and just say whatever we think, right? We want to
have open and forthright dialogue. That’ s excellent; for any
organization to be efficient, it’s necessary to have straightforward
communication about things that are important.
So who excels at frank communication? And can receive the
same without getting cranky? Answer: No one.
Besides Reds,  of course. For them, this is a nonissue. “Why are
we even talking about communication? It’s obvious that you say
what you think!” Many people find this stressful; to constantly have
the truth pushe d into your face can be onerous if you have difficulty
taking it.
My goal here isn’t to define what’ s right or wrong; I only want to
establish that all of us are dif ferent.
So why do we sometimes perceive Red behavior as threatening
and belligerent? Could it be that they don’t give up right away? That
they like to argue and debate even small matters if they find them
important? That they’ll raise their voices, glare daggers at people,
and pound their fists on the table if it suits them? That sometimes
they express themselves rather rudely?
Imagine the following scenario:
You have a project, something that you’ve spent a few days on,
or maybe even weeks. You begin to doubt yourself—have you
succeeded at your work? Is it as good as you wanted it to be? Would
you dare show it to the client as it is now, or should you ask for some
feedback from someone who you know will give you an honest
answer?
Just then a Red comes sauntering by, and you take a chance.
You are fully aware that this colleague—spouse, friend, cousin,
neighbor—will be honest. You ask for a frank opinion. With a degree

[PAGE 77]
of pride in your voice, you show him what you’ve accomp lished, and
you go through your process  step by step. Without you noticing, the
Red becomes impatient because he’s already decided what his
opinion is and he’s getting tired of you doing all the talking for so
long.
With a wave of his hand that effectively silences you, the Red
says, “It doesn ’t look that good. I don’t really like what you’ve done
here. In fact, it looks pretty rough. I’m amazed that you didn’t do
better than this. I think you have to redo the whole thing from start to
finish.”
Then he leaves without thinking any more about it. You’re left
there feeling forlorn and crushed, regardless of what color you are.
Exaggerated? Can this happ en in real life? At this stage, if you
believe that such nasty peop le don’t really exist then you’ve never
met a genuine Red. Or the Reds you have met have essentially
learned how to be dishonest.
Think about it. What’ s the purpose of cutting a person down to
size so completely? What were the Red’s intentions? It was to do
exactly what you asked. Y ou wanted an honest opinion!
“Say exactly what you think ,” you said. It’s possible you even
added: “I won’t be angry/ sad/disappointed/suicidal.” “Be prepared,”
says the Red, “because here it comes.” By asking for an honest
opinion, you released a flood of brutal candor . But you’ll survive—
perhaps with your self-confidence a little waterlogged and your ego
utterly drowned.
As a consultant, I have explained countless times that when a
Red goes all out on an issue that’s important to him, an issue on
which he does not intend to give up—well, the storm will be brutal. If
you’re afraid of conflict, then you shouldn’t put yourself in that
situation. A Red has no probl em with conflict. Reds don’t consciously
create conflict, but a refreshing quarrel every now and then can be a
good thing, don’t you think? It’ s just another way to communicate.
A little tip: The worst thing you can do once you get into a conflict
with a Red is back off. That tactic can cause you serious  problems.

[PAGE 78]
More on that later .
“ W h a t  A r e  Y o u  D o i n g  o v e r  T h e r e ?  I  C a n  S e e  W h a t  Y o u ’ r e  ( N o t )  D o i n g ! ”
What’ s behind the need to control? Simply put, the desire for
control is a phenomenon where an individual needs to have power
over a situation in which either groups or individuals are present.
Those who have control needs often feel extremely uneasy about
having to adapt themselves to a group or a situation and will eagerly
come up with various strategies to avoid this. A comm on form of
behavior is to talk constantly , interrupting and ignoring  others, in
order to maintain control over the conversation.
Reds can probably be perceived as extremely overbearing, but
it’s important to note they are interested in controlling those around
them, but not in controlling  every specific detail of a situation.
(Attention to or control over detail isn’t something we can accuse
Reds of.) But it is important for a Red to feel that he can influence
what people do and how they intend to act on certain specific issues.
At the heart of this need for control is a belief that they know more
than anyone else. And because a Red feels he knows best, he will
keep tabs on everyone around him to ensure that they all do the right
thing. The advantage for a Red is that he gets everythin g done his
way. The disadvantage is obvious: everyone else feels controlled.
Some people think it’s a good thing when someone else makes the
decisions and holds the baton, but others feel limited and just want
to escape.
Many years ago, I worked for a company in which one of the
middle manage rs was quite Red. (She was also a bit Blue—see the
section on Blue behavior .) When she delegated tasks to the
employees the effect was quite amusing. She usually had no
problem relinquishing certain things; she was even good at
delegating enjoyable tasks, something many executive s can find
difficult. Howev er, since she was Red, she was very quick in thought
and action. In practice, this meant that she hung around after she
had delegated a specific task—and if the task wasn’t done
immediately she would simply go and do it herself. When the

[PAGE 79]
employee in question got to that item on his to-do list, he often
discovered that it had already been done. Note: The dead line hadn’t
been reached yet.
Because this middle manager was Red-Blue, she did a much
better job than what the employee would have had he been given
the chance. Red means fast; Blue means high quality in
implementation. Unfortunat ely, criticism of the employee’ s
sluggishness was not slow in coming. As the Blue part of this
manager was precise with the details and the Red part gave criticism
very readily, she was perceived as quite rigid. Which bring s us on to
the next section.
“ I  T r y  t o  C a r e  A b o u t  Y o u ,  b u t  I t  W o u l d  H e l p  I f  Y o u  W e r e  a  L i t t l e  M o r e
I n t e r e s t i n g . ”
Have you ever met a person  completely without feelings? No, I
thought so. Once again—Reds are not typical relational people.
Nothing wrong with that, as long as the person you are
communicating with has the same focus as you. But if a Red speaks
to a pronounced relational person, like a Yellow or a Green, he can
be perceived as very coldhearted or inhuman.
Let me illustrate this with an example from my own personal
experience.
I had a colleag ue, whom I always appreciated very much (notice
that I start with the positives, to avoid ruf fling feathers—very Swedish
of me) and still have great respect for as a professional but also as a
good friend. Okay , it’s the infamous Bj örn again.
A few years ago, we were having a tough period in the company .
Fall had been a difficult and strenuous time: long days, late nights,
and frequent weekend work . We had worn ourselves out, we had
worn one another out, and we had worn out our respective families.
We were on our knees. We really deserved a quiet and restful
holiday season.
For the compa ny holiday party we went to a Japanese restaurant.
We had taken our shoes off and were sitting on cushions, each
holding a glass of sake in his hands. In typical Swedish fashion, we

[PAGE 80]
looked at the menus while, at the same time, keeping an eye on
what the others were thinking of ordering. Of course, most of us
didn’t want to order something that no one else chose.
Except for Björn. He glanced quickly through the menu and
declared what he had in mind. He was ready now and quickly grew
weary of those  of us who hadn’t decided yet. Needing something to
do, he started  a conversation. At the time, my daughter had just
changed schools, and Bj örn was inquisitive.
“How did everything go with the new school? How’ s the little
lassie doing?” Pleasantly surprised by his concern for my daughter , I
started to tell him. After about twenty seconds I noted that Björn’s
eyes began to wander . He looked around the restaurant with a facial
expression that said: Why is he telling me this?
He looked at me with a smile I interpreted as You know me. You
know how I function. I don’t actually want to talk any more about that!
And he quickly began talking about something completely dif ferent.
Ordinarily , I should have been a little bit offended, maybe even
insulted. How can anyone be so insensitive? Especially when the
other person is talking about something that he himself inquired
about?
Does this mean that Björn is coldhearted or that he cares nothing
for other people? Not at all. He cares just as much as anyone else,
but when he realized that everything was fine with my daughter he
simply lost interest. In usual fashion, he announced that the channel
of communication was closed . Instead of sitting there hemming and
hawing, preten ding to be interested in more or less meaningless
details, he said exactly what he felt.
Remember that we’re talking about interpretations and
perceptions here. The intent ion behind a particular behavior is one
thing; how we as recipients perceive it is another . Perso nally, I just
wanted to laugh the whole thing off, because I knew Björn very well.
I knew that he would never dream of hurting anyone deliberately .
When he tramples on peop le’s toes from time to time it’s never
intentional—it just happens. In reality , he is one of the warmest and

[PAGE 81]
most generous people I have ever met. It’s just that you have to
know him to understand this.
What would have been the correct answer to Bjorn’ s question
about my daughter?
“Great.”
It would have been enough.
“ I t  T a k e s  S t r e n g t h  t o  B e  A l o n e ,  a n d  I ’ m  t h e  S t r o n g e s t  o f  Y o u  A l l . ”
The word “egotistic” comes from the Latin word “ego,”  meaning
“I.” My I is, therefore, my ego. Linguistically , we have consequently
chosen to put some kind of equal sign between people with strong
egos and being selfish. Natur ally, there are many people in our world
who are selfish and egotist ical. The world is teeming with them.
Again, I want you to remember that we are speaking here about
perceived behavior .
If we look at how a Red communicates, we can understa nd why
many perceive him as egotistic:
•  “I think we should accept this proposal.”
•  “I want that assignment.”
•  “This is what I think about it.”
•  “I have a good idea.”
•  “Will we do this my way or the wrong way?”
Add a sharp eye and distinctive body language and you will see
someone who will take what he wants. He will fight for his interests.
He will tell everyone who will listen that he is capable of doing
whatever he undertakes. Some people, especially Greens, find that
this “I” form of speaking is unsettling. A Red’s “I” message occupies
their minds. (They share this trait with Yellows, who also have strong
egos.)
But we’ve learned to take care of one another . We know that
being solitary is not the same thing as being strong, that we need
one another to survive. Coop eration is the model, and I’ve preached
this for over two decades. So we think it’ s egotistic when Reds speak

[PAGE 82]
only about themselves. They  make sure to help themselves before
helping others. They are often willing to trample on some one else if
they see an opportunity to advance themselves. They may not do
this consciously , but the ef fect is the same.
Reds often come out the winners in discussions. They see this as
a natural part of a conversation. They always know best and will
assert that everyone else is wrong. It suits their ego to behave this
way. The aftermath of this method is that they lose friends, people
can dislike them, and they are cut off from information because no
one wants them in the group . Once they’ve noticed this, they may
well just decide that all the other people are idiots.
A few years ago, I was one of six people who was seate d at the
table having an evening meal. In some anguish, a man, Green-Blue,
told me he was not feeling well. He couldn’t live up to the
responsibilities his employer laid on his shoulders. He was hard-
pressed by his burdensome  workload, and he found it difficult to
sleep at night. This caused even more stress for him because he
knew that if he didn’t get a good night’ s rest it would be even harder
for him to perfo rm at work. His wife, sitting beside him, tried to hide
her discomfort. The situation was certainly not comfortable for
anyone in the room. Every one at the table offered encouraging
remarks along with cautious questions about how he thought he
might be able to reverse the difficult situation. We all expressed our
support as far as we could.
Except for the Red. After ten minutes, the only Red at the table
finally had enough and tore into the distraught, stressed-out little
devil.
The Red’s analysis was as clear as day: “I think you complain too
much. You’re just earning your salary . I’ve never been sick, and I
think people worry too much; I would never end up in your situation,
and I really think you should pull yourself together .”
What a dinner that was! Let’s be honest—Reds are the ones who
always believe they are surrounded by idiots.

[PAGE 83]
How Yellow People Are Perceived
Funny , entertai ning, and almost divinely positive. Absolute ly. Again—
this is their own interpretation . If you ask other people about Yellows,
you may well get a somew hat different picture. Many people will
agree with what you have read up to now, but you will also hear
other commen ts. It’s especially fun to ask the Blues. They will say
that Yellows are selfish, superficial, and overly self-confident.
Someone else will say that they talk too much and are bad listeners.
Combine that with the obser vation that they can be distracted and
careless. Suddenly the picture is not as flattering.
When a Yellow hears these comments, one of two things can
happen. Either  he gets deeply distressed and genuinely hurt, or he
sets off a ferocious argument. It depends. What’ s striking is that,
over time, none of this criticism will really torment a Yellow very
much. On the one hand, he’s a bad listener , and on the other hand,
he has what some psychologists might call a selective memory . He
simply forgets the difficult bits, and with his positive ethos  he finds it
easy to say to himself that he doesn’t have any faults or
shortcomings.
Let’s have a look at what Yellows struggle with—even if they don’t
always know it.
“ H e l l o ,  A n y o n e  T h e r e ?  L i s t e n  t o  W h a t  H a p p e n e d  t o  M e !  Y o u  W a n t  t o  K n o w ,
R i g h t ? ”
At the beginni ng of this chapter, I pointed out that Yellows are
very good communicators. I would like to repeat that now .
Yellows are very good communicators. With an emphasis on
“very .” None of the other colors come close to the Yellows’ ease in
finding words, expressing themselves, and telling a story . It comes
so easily , so simply , so effortlessly , that you can’t help being
impressed. It’s common knowledge that most people don’t like
speaking in front of others. They get heart palpit ations and sweaty
palms, terrified  of making fools of themselves. This is totally alien to
Yellows. Makin g fools of them selves isn’t part of the deal, and if the

[PAGE 84]
improbable were to happen you could always laugh it off with
another amusing anecdote.
However , it may be too much of a good thing. Regardless of what
you are good at, there is a limit, a time to break off. Yellows,
especially those without self-awareness, don’t have such a limit. It
would never even occur to them to wrap up; if they have something
to say, out it comes. The fact that no one else thinks it’s important is
neither here nor there.
A Yellow behaves exactly like most people—he does what he’s
good at. And he is good at talking. There are countless examples of
Yellows who completely dominate a conversation. Then add a hefty
dose of poor listening and an interesting (read: one-sided)
communication takes place.
Many people become hugely frustrated by this limitless verbosity .
It’s often perceived as egocentrism. The terms “windbag,” “verbal
diarrhea,” and “motormouth” were more than likely coined with
Yellows in mind.
Countless times I’ve experienced the following: A group of people
are sitting around a boardr oom table. The top dog in the room
expresses an idea; it can be about anything at all. When the time
comes for comments, all the Yellows will reinforce the idea by
repeating the exact same thing, possibly with their own words. (I
would like to say to the wom en reading this that I am aware of the
fact that this is more male behavior than female.) Why do they do
that? Well, first, it’s important to signal when you are in agreement,
and second, they can say it so much better .
A few years ago, I was with a management team studyin g group
dynamics. I had just purchased a cell phone with a stopwatch. Using
this, I could time who had spoken in the group and for how long.
In the room were the CEO and his seven closest associates.
Peter , the sales manager , was really Yellow and he had only had one
point of the nineteen on the agenda. Take a good look at the ratio
1:19. This represents around 5.3 percent of the agenda.

[PAGE 85]
The CEO opened the meeting, but pretty soon a clear pattern
emerged. Peter had opinions  about every single item on the agenda.
I used my stopwatch and was fascinated by what I saw. He spoke 69
percent of the time. Yes. It’s true. Thirty-one percent went to the
other seven, including the CEO himself.
If you’re  Yellow , you may have already charged on ahead in this
book, because you possibly recognized yourself and thought that
this was a very unfair exam ple. Everyone else is wondering how
that’s even possible. How can one person dominate the conversation
so fully? It’s possible because Yellows have no problems delivering
opinions, views, and advice regardless of whether they know
anything about the subject or not. A Yellow has a generous approach
to his own ability—when an idea pops up in his head, he simply
opens his mouth.
People say that for Reds thought and action are the same thing.
For Yellows, I would suggest the idea that thought and speech are
interrelated. What Yellows share is often completely unprocessed
material that just tumbles out of the big opening on their faces. Sure,
it might be well thought out, but it’s usually not. What’s most
deceptive is that, almost without exception, it sounds very good.
Yellows know a thing or two about presenting an idea so that it
always sounds fantastic. If you’re unfamiliar with this particular
person, you may very well take everything he says as true—a
serious mistake.
Very often a Yellow is both entertaining and inspiring, and as I
said, they can inspire people to new ideas. But should you get into a
conversation with a Yellow , you need to be observant so that when
he catches his breath you can quickly insert a comment.  Or simply
close the meeting.
“ I  K n o w  I t  L o o k s  M e s s y ,  b u t  T h e r e ’ s  a  M e t h o d  t o  t h e  M a d n e s s ! ”
A Yellow would hardly admit that he’s careless. But he has no
natural way to keep track of things. He finds working in a structured
way boring. Then you have to fit the mold and follow the template. If

[PAGE 86]
there is anything that Yellows avoid, it’s feeling controlled by fixed
systems.
The solution is to keep everything in your head, which doesn’t
work. It’s not possible to remember everything. So inevitably the
Yellow forgets  and those around him think he’s careless. Missed
appointments, forgotten deadlines, and half-finished projects all
because once his mind has finished the task he doesn’t go
backwards. He goes forward . Leaps to the next project. Deals with
other things.
Details. To complete a proje ct, you usually need to be precise
about details. Yellows don’t like keeping track of details. I would even
venture to say that they’re not interested in details. They  paint with
broad strokes.
Generally , Yellows are very good at launching things. They’re
resourceful, and with boundless creativity at their disposal, they can
kick off various  kinds of proje cts. But they’re not as good at finishing
things. Finishing anything 100 percent requires an ability to
concentrate that a Yellow rarely possesses. He gets tired and moves
on. And so we think that he’s careless. He thinks that his work is
good enough. My goodness, why worry about trifles? This turned out
quite well, after all! The fact that threads are hanging from the shirt
or that the document is full of spelling errors is not as important as
thinking up new things.
This is repeated in many different spheres. I have a few
acquaintances who are hope less at keeping time. They are always
pleased and excited to think things up, but they are optimists when it
comes to time. It makes absolutely no difference what time you
suggest; they will not be on time. Seven o’clock, half past seven, or
eight. It’s unimportant. They’ re late regardless. And when they talk
about it, they haggle down their late arrival from forty-five minutes to
a little over fifteen minutes. After a while, they actually  believe it
themselves. But it doesn’t matter—the rest of us wait patiently
because their presence will be the highlight of the evening.
“ L o o k ,  I  C a n  J u g g l e  A l l  t h e  B a l l s  a t  t h e  S a m e  T i m e ! ”

[PAGE 87]
We need to talk a little about Yellow’ s inability to concentrate.
He’s always prepared for new experiences. This is the downside to
the incredible openness Yellows have for new things, ideas, and
impressions. There are so many new things!
And because “new” is synonymous with “good” for a Yellow , it’s
best that something new happens all the time. Otherwise, our Yellow
friend will lose focus. He can’t be bothered listening to the whole
story , the background, and all the details and facts that may actually
be relevant. It’s not interesting to him, and he will lose his
concentration.
What does he do then? Simple. Something else. He throws up
another ball to juggle. The problem with all these balls is that he
might be able to keep them in the air for a while, but he can’t get
them down into the right box at the right time. Instead, he leaves the
room and the juggled balls tumble down right into someone else’s
lap. In a meeting, he may very well start playing with his mobile
phone or his computer or will start chatting to the person beside him.
Softly at first, thinking that no one will notice anything. It’s not true, of
course; everyone gets quite irritated. But if no one says anything he’ll
just continue. Here Yellows are like little children. They are good at
testing the limits. They conti nue until someone becomes  too angry
and puts his foot down. And, of course, then the Yellow feels hurt.
He just wanted to …
The way Yellows often quickly get bored can have far greater
consequences than a little disruptive behavior during meetings.
They’re not good at everyday trivial things like administration and
follow-ups. As usual, most Y ellows would contest what I just wrote. In
their own eyes, they are the masters even here. But if we consider
the ability to follow up, this could be a serious threat to the effective
implementation of a project.
New project—great! Put together a new and dynamic team full of
interesting people—check! Get everything going and develop ideas
and concepts—are you kidding? Already done that! Working like
crazy in the beginning to really get things sped up? Yup. But then?

[PAGE 88]
Following up on what is actually happening or not happ ening in a
project is extremely boring. That means looking backwards; that’s
dull, and it won’t happen. A Yellow can’t keep his concentration long
enough to follow through. He would rather persuade himself that it’s
important to have confidence  in people and just trust that the project
gets done
A funny example happened once when I coached sales reps at a
large commerc ial TV channel. I sat with a female seller , a clever
young woman  who made big business deals. We had identified
some weaknesses in her behavior profile—after she had struggled to
convince me that even bad traits could be quite good—and now
started to make a plan for how she would proceed in her personal
development.
It began to fall apart on the first point: When would she begin?
She couldn’t start that day because it was already past three in
the afternoon. And tomorrow was full of meetings. It had to be next
week. But she was away then. Maybe the week after that; she would
check her calendar and see.
She had lost the match before she had even begun.
“ M e !  M e ! !  M e ! ! ! ”
Yellows aren’t necessarily more selfish than others, but they
always seem to be. Why? Mostly because of their dialogue, since
they primarily talk about themselves. And when other people are not
sufficiently interesting and exciting, a Yellow will interrupt  and guide
the topic towards something far more interesting—not infrequently
himself.
I remem ber a seller I encou ntered during a conference with a
pharmaceutical company a few years ago. Gustav exhibited all of the
less successful aspects of Y ellow behavior , and the problem was that
he was completely unaware of it. He very rarely spoke about
anything but himself and the things he had done, and he behaved as
if he were the one who was leading the conference and not me. I
have my meth ods to deal with those boys. But it’s amusin g to study

[PAGE 89]
them for a while before I adjust their behavior with a few choice
words during the first break.
A few examples: Every time I put a question to the group, Gustav
answered. His quick answers would have indicated enga gement—if
it had not been for the fact that he was often actuall y spewing
nonsense. He simply said the things that popped into his head. He
couldn’t keep his thoughts in his own head, and everything just
tumbled out. When I direc ted my attention to one of Gustav’ s
colleagues instead of him, he simply leaned into my field of vision
and continued talking.
When I began directing questions to specific people in the room—
simply calling them by name—Gustav answered anyway . Pretty
impressive, right? He would speak for a while and then ask Sven,
“That’ s what you were going to say, right, Sven?” Sven just shook his
head. He was used to this. Gustav continued like that the whole
morning before I could rein in him. He just charged in whenever
there was a gap or a few seconds’ silence.
He never allowed anyone to speak and everything he said was to
be taken as gospel truth. He dominated the room without even
thinking about the other nineteen people. The funny thing was that
everyone was aware of what was going on. But no one had the
energy to stand up to Gustav . They just stared at me with slight
desperation in their eyes, hoping that I had some way of silencing
him.
During lunch, he proclaimed far and wide, so that everyone heard
it, that he thought the conference was going very well. By that point
the majority of the group hated the very sound of his voice. They
could barely put up with him. To save them from their suffering, I had
to have  a quick feedback intervention with him during the coffee
break—something you’ll learn more about when I discuss giving
feedback.
“ Y o u  N e v e r  T o l d  M e  T h a t ,  I  W o u l d  R e m e m b e r ! ”
If a Yellow is anything, it’s a bad listener . They’re really miserable
at it, in point of fact. Many Yellows I have met say that they are very

[PAGE 90]
good listeners—and of course supplied entertaining examples of this
undeniable fact—but maybe it could be their memory that was at
fault. Basically , they believe that they listen very well, but somewhere
along the way to the brain’ s storage shelves whatever they heard
simply gets lost—poof!
No, it’s not about memory . It’s about how a Yellow is often
uninterested in what others say because he knows he could say it so
much better himself. He doesn’t stay focused; he begins thinking
about other things, begins doing other things. He does not want to
listen—he wants to talk.
They’re also quite childish in that they only like doing things that
are enjoyable. If a statement or story or just a normal conversation is
boring, then they close their ears. Of course, there’ s a remedy—take
a course in entertaining rhetoric; then you may be able to keep your
Yellow friend’ s, partner ’s, or colleague’ s attention. If you can present
your message in a more amusing way, he’ll at least remain seated a
bit longer . Rhetoric isn’t the art of talking but rather the art of getting
others to listen.
If you have a good friend whom at this stage you have identified
as Yellow , you know exactly what I’m talking about. In mid-sentence,
he open s his mouth and starts talking about something completely
different. Bad memory? No, you were simply being tedious. But truly
—add a bad memory into the equation and we really are in trouble.
Many truly successful people  in society are often better listeners
than the general average. They don’t willingly talk as much as they
listen. They already know what they know , and to learn more they
simply have to hush up and hear what others are saying. It’s a way
to absorb new knowledge. This is something Yellows need to
understand better if they’re not to be perceived as completely
hopeless—or just stagnant in their personal development. They
must, for exam ple, listen to the message I have presented in this last
section. If they refuse to take it in just because it is a difficult and
possibly a boring message, they’ll never learn anything.

[PAGE 91]
How Green People Are Perceived
So what do others—other colors—think about Greens? The picture
is ambi valent. Besides the fact that they are considered pleasant,
friendly , and caring, there are other opinions. A person who, out of
fear of conflict, says yes but means no—how do you handle him?
How do you know what he really thinks?
Reds and Yellows especially have problems with what I call the
silent resistance. Remaining silent rather than speaking out. Certain
Greens, howev er, tend to tell the truth behind the back of the person
concerned. Therefore, others can perceive a Green as dishonest,
even though their intention is only to avoid conflict. In general,
Greens always expect the worst and therefore tend to lie low .
Then we have the Green’ s inability to change. When a Green
understands the need for change but still says no thanks,  that leads
those closest to him to think that he is afraid of change, stubborn,
unconcerned, and indifferent. As usual, we are talking about
perceptions. If we ask Reds what they think about Greens, there will
be some heavy opinions.
P i g h e a d e d n e s s  W i l l  N e v e r  B e  a  V i r t u e
What do you do with a person who never changes his views?
Ever? Not even when the facts indicate that it’s time to take a
different path? How do you handle someone whose resolve to
continue on the present course has completely taken over?
The difference  between Greens and Blues is that while a Blue
holds out for more facts about an issue, Greens expect everything to
simply blow over, since they refuse to change their minds. They’ve
made a decision about something and will not concede. Why?
Because they don’t usually do that.
Think about it: It may have taken you your whole life to come to a
particular opinion about the dangerous cholesterol in food, about
space travel, or about Britney Spears. Suddenly this guy comes
along and says that you should exchange your current opinion for
his.

[PAGE 92]
It’s not going to happen. The Green is waiting for the right feeling
to come over him before he makes any changes. If it does n’t, well …
they’re often rather patient.
Let me tell you about a young  man, the son in a family I’ve known
very well for many years. This guy is reasonably good in school; his
grades are okay . He has many pals.
At the outset, I would like to point out that when we spea k about
young people, in this case a teenager , we must be carefu l. This isn’t
a fully developed behavior profile or character . Young people still
have things to learn about life in general. All impressions are not
definitive.
So what’ s the problem?
This young man has his own ideas about what is true and false.
And wild horses couldn’t get him to change his mind. It may be
something he heard from a friend or something he saw on television
or some thing he picked up in school. When this knowledge or idea,
irrespective of its source, has been established in his consciousness,
it can’t be dislodged. It makes no difference how often his parents
point out the facts or how tough they are when they present the
evidence—his point of view is clear . It doesn’t even matter if they
point out the danger in this or that way of thinking; he persists in his
belief.
Think about it. Y ou supply all the available facts, and the guy says
that he understands. He agrees that it sounds logical. Other people
could feasibly do it that way, with good results. But still, he’s not
prepared to change his point of view. Some people would call this
pigheadedness.
What’ s the reason for this? Excellent question. It may be a result
of where he first got the information. If a friend says that you can
earn just as much money collecting trash as a newly qualified doctor
can earn, it doesn’t really matter if it’s true or not. If the same friend
suggests that you can’t be arrested for drunk driving if you drive your
car after drinking three beers, then this becomes the truth, even if

[PAGE 93]
we, with all the facts at our disposal, know that this is simply not the
case.
If this guy is told that he’ll get a terrific job if he just works a little
harder at mathematics, it becomes true. If he got this info from his
best mate, it simply has to be true. If a Green trusts in a particular
individual, that individual’ s word becomes law. This makes it easy to
exploit Greens, because they can be a little naïve and gullible. And
unfortunately , certain people take advantage of this fact.
Sometimes this obstinacy becomes a strength, no doubt about
that. But when those around them perceive it as pure
pigheadedness, it can create problems.
“ W h y  B o t h e r ?  N o t h i n g  I s  W o r t h  C a r i n g  A b o u t . ”
Since Greens rarely make the first move and almost alway s allow
others to step up first, you can easily get the impression that a Green
is not especiall y interested or engaged. And often that’s the case. He
is more  passive than he is active, and this has an impact on his
behavior . Not much is going on there.
And what does it really matter? If you stay at home—nothing can
really go wron g then, right? What Greens fail to see is that most
other people want to do things. They assume that everyone thinks as
they do and stays on the sofa. They are satisfied with doing nothing.
Anything that upsets this standpoint becomes a threat. The result?
Even more passivity .
On one occasion, I heard a Red-Y ellow boss describe his
employees as uninspired and uninterested in their work. It tormented
him because no matter how hard he tried to entice and insist, they
never left the starting block. He presented numerous ideas—some of
which were very interesting— but nothing happened. It can be like
that with Green s. They recognize a good idea as quickly as anyone
else. But, for example, while their Red colleagues sprint off with the
baton, a Green  just sits and waits. Often they’re waiting for the right
feeling to convince them of an idea’ s merit and if that doesn’t
happen, well … they wouldn’t do anything anyway , so they get what
they want. Why not just wait and see if the urge to act goes away?

[PAGE 94]
This particular boss called in his employees and asked them how
they viewed the business. He was worried about the evident lack of
discernible commitment. A couple of the men, who were lower
middle age, said straight-out that they couldn’t think of anything that
was worth getting involved in. The boss became extremely
frustrated. He tried everything but got virtually no reaction.
This can also happen in a marriage. There are stereoty pes for
everything. Like that some women might be drawn to the strong,
silent type, for example. Nothing wrong with that. But after they’re
married and she realizes that this is all that he is—strong and silent
—she may not be as happy . And when she makes plans and he
says he doesn’t care, she gets frustrated. And so she makes even
bigger plans. And he clutches the armrests on his favorite recliner
even harder .
This is the paradox. The bigger the plans, the less likely it is that
a Green will commit. All he wants is peace and quiet.
Here’ s an example: I’ve been writing fiction for twenty years and
really hoped to become a published author one day. Everyone in the
family knew this. Not that I made a huge deal out of it, but I didn’t
hide my ambitions, either . One Green close to me understood how
important it was for me to succeed. I have repeatedly spoken about
my dream, explaining how it would make me feel if I succeeded as
an author of fiction. Yet this Green never asked how my writing was
going. Maybe a comment every five years that I shouldn’t take things
so serio usly or I will only be disappointed. And when I said things
like: “This year it will happen. Now is the time, damn it. I’ve got to
work harder to succeed!” the response was: “Wow. That’ s a lot of
work.” Lots of work is a Green’ s greatest enemy , just because that’s
exactly what it is—work. They live in a mind-set that everything
should be easy .
This form of indifference and lack of commitment can kill the
enthusiasm of even the most inspired person. I had to learn to rely
on others to find the energy to struggle on with my writing. But a
Green doesn’t  understand this. He doesn’t want people  to be too

[PAGE 95]
involved, because it’s just bothersome. Instead, let’s just sit here and
do … nothing.
W h a t ’ s  T h o u g h t  i n  S e c r e t  I s  S a i d  i n  S e c r e t
Greens are reluctant to take a position on sensitive issues. They
have just as many views and opinions as anyone else, but they don’t
like shouting them from the rooftops. The reason is simple—it can
cause a fuss.
The consequence of this tendency is a rather abstruse manner of
expressing themselves. Instead of saying, “That’ s imposs ible,” they
may respond with something  like, “It appears that there are a few
challenges in delivering that.”  Sure, both statements mean the same
thing: “We won’t manage to do it in time.” But by using a less direct
means of expression, you take fewer risks. If you take a clear stance
on something, then you have to stand up for it.
For a Green, it’s better to be safe than sorry . By expressing
himself ambiguously , he avoids taking responsibility for the matter in
question. He doesn’t have to risk his good name if he’s uncertain. If
he hasn’t taken a position in support of something, he also hasn’t
taken any position against something. You hear how illogical this
sounds, right? But if you’re Green, you know exactly what  I mean. A
woman I met once said that she believed what everyone else
believed.
But are Greens perceived as unclear just because they want to
save a relation ship? No, not at all. Greens just aren’t as precise as
the other colors. When a Red says that he absolutely hates listening
to Eminem, a Green would say that he remembers better singers.
When a Blue says that he has lost five pounds since last Tuesday
morning at 10:03, a Green says that he’ s lost a few pounds lately .
This is becaus e Greens are not as task oriented as Reds and
Blues. Greens don’t speak about facts in the same way. They would
rather speak about relationships and feelings, which makes it more
difficult to be precise. How do you measure a feeling? Saying, “I love
you exactly twelve percent more than last month,” is just not going to
work.

[PAGE 96]
“ I  K n o w  I  S h o u l d  C h a n g e  T h i s  I m m e d i a t e l y ,  b u t  I ’ l l  J u s t  T h i n k  A b o u t  I t  f o r  a
W h i l e . ”
Here we have the most difficult stumbling block. If you want to
make changes  in a group consisting of many Greens, good luck. If
it’s a major change, you shou ld consider whether it’s really worth the
effort. If it’s urgent, you can forget the whole thing. This is what
happens in the mind of a Green:
•  I know what I have but not what I’ll get.
•  It was better before.
•  I’ve never done this before.
•  The grass is not always greener on the other side.
Sound familiar ? Sure, not all changes are for the better , but let’s
be reasonable! I’m not saying that it’s always wrong to express these
sentiments, but when changes are really necessary it can be very
dangerous.
A classic cliché—a little worn now, I know—is to consider how
often you change where you sit at the breakfast table. I used to ask
this question in the groups I met. Many smiled and said that they sat
where they usually sit because it just happened. Sure, I do the same
thing sometime s. But if someone were to point out that I was stuck in
a rigid habit (or bad habit) I would do something about it. A Green,
however , doesn’t correct himself.
When you look at a Green ’s reaction to the question, you’ll
understand that we’re faced with a problem. I’ve seen adults become
white in the face, wiping their foreheads at the mere thought of sitting
on the other side of the table. I’ve even worked with a man, Sune,
who had such a meticulous  lunchtime routine that if he couldn’t
follow it precisely the rest of the day was shrouded  in sheer
darkness. Sune had a favorite lunch spot beneath a painting. He sat
there every day at lunchtime, week in, week out, month out and year
in. Always the same chair .
If he came into the dining room and saw that his spot was
occupied, he would stop short. If he saw this quickly enough, he’d

[PAGE 97]
turn towards his backup location, not as good but still an acceptable
spot, near a window . If he were forced to have his soup there, he
would glare throughout the meal at whoever had nicked “his” spot.
Of course, he never said anything. Instead, he just sulked  the rest of
the day. This is another thing Greens often do—turn frustration
inwards and feel awful so that everyone notices it. If Sune’s backup
spot was also occupied, he would just go back into the kitchen, the
rest of his day ruined.
Let me give you another example. My mother—departed but
never forgotten; we’ll never stop loving you, our darling mother—who
was nothing if not Green, was always willing to help and took care of
her grandchildren whenever needed, especially when they were
little. I remember one time when my wife and I were invited to dinner
on a Friday night. I had aske d my mother to watch the kids weeks in
advance becau se I knew that she needed time to menta lly prepare
herself for it.
On the day the dinner was to take place, the hostess called: Her
husband was sick, and the whole thing was postponed. When I
phoned my mum, I explained to her what had happened.  We would
be staying home that night. She went completely silent. I said that I
still wanted her to come over because the children were  excited to
see their grandma.
Mum was very hesitant. “What will happen now?” she asked.
I said that it would be just like we had planned originally . Because
her bag was packed and the guest room was ready , it would be a
perfect opportu nity to spend a little time together . She hesitated. “It
will be comple tely different now: You’re at home.” She was flustered
by the change, and she needed time to think. She promised to
phone back.
What was really Mum’ s problem? Our change of plans
necessitated no change for her at all. She was still going to stay
overnight betw een Friday and Saturday . She could still see her
grandchildren. She would, however , avoid having any responsibility

[PAGE 98]
for them. I tried to convince her that we could take care of her for
once, instead of her taking care of us.
This was a completely new situation for her. We were still there in
the house. And that was the problem. My wife and I would be there.
Maybe Mum had her heart set on a watching a particular show on
television. Maybe she had thought about preparing a special meal
for the children. Maybe, I don’t know . She never said anything about
it, so we can’t know for sure.  But the change was serious  enough to
warrant extra thinking time for her .
(She came in the end. A nice little side story , quite possibly
related to her generation: I fetched her at half past four. She asked
why I came so late. I replied  that I had promised to be there at five
o’clock and that I was actually half an hour early . Her response?
She’d been ready since four o’clock.)
“ I ’ v e  N e v e r  B e e n  S o  U p s e t ,  b u t  f o r  G o d ’ s  S a k e ,  D o n ’ t  S a y  A n y t h i n g  t o
A n y o n e . ”
This is the second major dilemma with Green behavior . They
despise a squabble. This aversion to conflict also causes many other
challenges, such as stubbornness, ambiguity , and resistance to
change. Because Greens are pronounced relational peop le, nothing
is more important to them than keeping a relationship together . The
problem is that their method doesn’t work.
You can look at conflicts in two ways. The first way is called the
harmony outlook, or striving for harmony . Everything depends on
being on good terms with others. Reaching an agreement is an end
in itself. This means that those who cause conflict are problematic
troublemakers. Conflicts are indicative of poor leadership, poor
communication, and discord. And so we smother conflict and
pretend that it doesn’t exist. Because who wants to be acquainted
with a troublemaker?
I once met a coach who used an interesting metaphor for this
kind of behavio r. She said it was like sitting at the dinner table with a
rotting pile of trash in the middle. You know , with mold and flies and
everything. Everyone sees that the trash is there, but no one says

[PAGE 99]
anything. You brush away the flies and pass the food across the
liquefying bana na peels without thinking anything about it. Maybe by
the end someone wonders if there even really is a pile of trash on
the table at all. Finally , one of the dinner table guests says, “We have
to do something about this!” That person becomes an agitator ,
because we now have to deal with this nasty mess of garbage.
Couldn’t she have just kept quiet?
Nowadays we know better . The aspiration of having everyone in
agreement about everything all the time is an impossible utopia, not
even worth trying to achiev e. Someone will lift the lid off all that
discord that was so effective ly and hermetically sealed for such a
long period of time—and what happens then? It stinks from a long
way of f. In the end the harmony outlook inevitably leads to conflict.
The second way, and the opposite to the first, is called the conflict
outlook. It basically means that we accept that conflicts exist—that
it’s natural. No group exists where everyone is always in agreement
about everything.
The whole point of the confli ct outlook is to deal with every little
dissentient issue as soon as it shows its head. Reds, and also some
Yellows, do this naturally . When they see something that doesn’t
work, they say that it doesn’t work. This means that problems can be
resolved at an early stage. But you have to deal with the issue
before it begins to stink.
The conflict approach usually creates harmony .
But a Green will just turn a deaf ear. He’ll do everythin g in his
power to maintain that magical feeling that everyone is in agreement.
It’s nicer when everyone agrees, isn’t it? Wouldn’t the world be so
much better if there were no conflicts?
Consider a situation all of us have experienced at some point.
We’re in a meeting at work. There are maybe ten people present in
the room. Add or subtract from this so that you recognize the
situation. Someone—the boss or anyone at all—has just completed
his presentation and now asks what everyone is thinking. Full of
expectation, he looks around, waiting for feedback.

[PAGE 100]
If there are any Reds or Yellows in the room, they will speak
about their views on the proposal they’ve just seen. The Reds will
love it or loathe it. The Yellow s will speak about their own reflections
on the proposal. One or two Blues might have a few questions.
What do the Greens do? Absolutely nothing. They just lean back
in their chairs and let them selves absorb the proposal.  They say
nothing at all unless asked a direct question. They look anxiously
around, hoping  that someone will say that this proposal is, in fact, an
incomprehensible mess. The group is too large for them  to trot out
any dissenting opinions. To say something truly dramatic or negative
would mean that everyone’ s eyes will be on you, and that’s not going
to happen. If they say what they are really thinking, a heated debate
will erupt, and since a Green doesn’t want to take part in heated
debates—he doesn’t even want to be in the same room as one—he
simply keeps silent.
How will the speaker respond? He’ll assume that everyone is in
agreement, right? What he doesn’t know is that half the people in the
room think it was the stupidest thing they have ever heard. When the
truth creeps out—it has to, sooner or later—guess what happens
then? Exactly—conflict.
You can be certain that while you are standing at the coffee
machine and maybe even while visiting the restroom the truth will
come out. When Greens need to relieve the pressure of not
speaking out, they talk behind your back. In small groups of two or
three people, they will gladly vent their displeasure. And they’re good
at it. As long as they think they can escape your gaze, they’ll
backbite you in ways you would never expect from a Green.
How Blue People Are Perceived
Even perfectionist Blue individuals receive criticism. It can be about
how they are perceived as evasive, defensive, perfectionist,
reserved, fastidious, meticulous, hesitant, conservative, lacking
independence, questioning, suspicious, tedious, aloof, and

[PAGE 101]
coldhearted. Ooph! The list of shortcomings found in these bastions
of bureaucracy often tends to be quite long.
But mainly, Blues find it difficult to begin anything new because
they want to prepare very thoroughly . Everything involves  risks, and
Blues can be almost obsess ed with details. Never place too many
Blues in the same group. They’ll plan into the next centu ry without
ever putting a shovel to the ground.
Furthermore, many Blues are perceived as highly critical and
almost suspicious. They miss nothing, and they have a tendency to
deliver their observations in an insensitive fashion. They create
quality work, but their hairsplitting, critical approach to almost
everything lowers the morale  of those around them to dangerously
low levels. These are people who consider themselves to be realists.
When they—in everyone else’ s eyes—are, in fact, pessimists.
“ N i n e t y - f i v e  P e r c e n t  R i g h t  I s  A c t u a l l y  1 0 0  P e r c e n t  W r o n g . ”
Let’s be hones t from the start. All this keeping track of facts and
focusing on details can go too far. There are limits to when it’s
reasonable to keep research ing. Do you remember the CEO who
wanted to buy leadership training? He never left the starting block.
Blues want to have all the information on everything, and this can
lead to problems with those around them. People who would be
satisfied with good enough simply can’t cope with hearing all those
questions and all this relentless poking into details. A Blue believes
that good enough is never really good enough.
I enjoy working around the house—changing the decor , hanging
wallpaper every now and then. A few years ago, we remodeled our
kitchen, and even though I got tremendous help from my family , I did
quite a lot myself. I worked and toiled and was quite happy when it
was finished. For a DIY er, I thought I managed it quite well.
Hans, a good friend of mine, came by. We’ve known each other
for many years, and he’s very much on the ball. He knew that I’d
worked very hard and that I felt quite pleased with myself. When he
came into my kitchen, he looked around and said quietly , “New
kitchen? Looks good. That cupboard door is crooked.”

[PAGE 102]
Okay , so maybe it wasn’t nice to hear that. But for Hans, it was
the highest form of logic. He observed a mistake and his sense of
perfection meant that he couldn’t ignore it. Besides, he is not a
typical relational person, so he couldn’t help saying things as they
were. He wasn’t directly criticizing me, only something I had done.
Namely , not fitting the cupboard door straight.
Fastidiousness can be expressed in various ways: It can be a
person who can’t cope with papers that aren’t perfectly aligned on a
desk, who rewrites an email about fifteen times to get it truly perfect,
or who works for hours on a simple Excel spreadsheet or
PowerPoint presentation, just giving it the finishing touches.
T h e y  N e v e r  F i n i s h  A n y t h i n g .  T h e r e ’ s  A l w a y s  M o r e  t o  D o .
Once, I was holding a communication training program  for a
group of peop le, all of who were working in the same room. The
group consisted of about twenty people. The first afternoon, I handed
out the results of the behavior analysis that each of them had taken
earlier . Everyo ne read about themselves with increasing fascination,
and most of them seemed very satisfied.
Except for one lady. She was extremely upset by her analysis. It
was, in fact, completely incorrect. After confirming with her that it
was okay to discuss it in front of the whole group, I asked what it was
she was displeased with.
“There’ s so much that’s incorrect,” she told us. For example, the
analysis revealed that she could be a perfectionist. She wasn’t like
that at all. I noticed the tiny smiles appearing on peop le’s faces.
Apparently , her colleagues knew something she didn’t.
I asked her why she thought that the analysis maintained she was
a perfe ctionist. She had no idea. The whole thing was a complete
mystery . It was a totally useless tool.
Realizing that the woman was Blue, I was careful not to argue too
much. She wouldn’t take me at my word. I was just some random
consultant who had been working with this tool for a measly twenty
years. What did I know?

[PAGE 103]
Instead, I asked her to give an example showing that she was not
a perfe ctionist. No problem, she had plenty . For example, she had
three children, each of who had three best pals. When she came
home in the evenings, there were so many shoes piled up inside the
front door that she had to do the high jump to get in. She began by
shaking the dirt off the doormat and putting the shoes in order . She
confided in me that she used to put size 10 at the back, as those
guys went home last, so it seemed most logical. She placed the
smaller sizes closest to the door in neat rows.
Then she went  into the kitche n. What did she see there? Crumbs
everywhere. All of these youngsters had been eating sandwiches,
and the kitchen  looked like a war zone. It took her twenty minutes to
sanitize everything, put everything back in place, sweep, wipe the
tables and worktops. Only then could she take off her coat and relax
a little.
Her colleagues were in stitches. The woman looked around, not
understanding what the excitement was all about. That any of this
could even be remotely obsessive was beyond her. Her house was
so untidy , that was her point.
The funny thing about this story is that a few years later I met the
same woman but in a totally  different context. She gave me a big
hug and said that the analysis of her behavior was 100 percent
correct. Stunned, I wondered how she arrived at that conclusion.
It turned  out that she had kept the behavior profile in her purse for
a while; the analysis had a list of behaviors and qualities, and every
time she found  herself doing one she ticked it off on the sheet. In the
end, she had ticked all of them off. She liked the profile. An amazing
tool, on the whole.
“ I  D o n ’ t  R e a l l y  K n o w  Y o u ,  S o  K e e p  Y o u r  D i s t a n c e . ”
You’ve done it. I’ve done it. We’ve all done it. Gone up to a
person who seems to be a decent fellow and started talking about
this and that thinking you’re going to have a nice chat. After a while,
you realize that you’re the one doing all the talking. If you have
Yellow traits in your behavior , you may notice that there are strange

[PAGE 104]
pauses in the dialogue. If there really is a dialogue. You may notice
that the other person fidgets a bit, signaling that he doesn’t want to
be part of this conversation.
“What’ s going on? W e’re just talking about the game yesterday , or
about what the family did last summer , or where you inten d to go on
vacation. Do we have a problem, or what?”
Yes, in fact we do, because this person doesn’t willingly speak
with strangers. “Wait a minute,” you may say. “We’ve been working
together for three months, and by now it should be perfectly okay to
ask what his dog’s name is.” But this guy requires a lot of personal
space, both physically and psychologically . He needs to know a
person extremely well before  opening up. Not like a Red, who lets
out with whatever he feels; not like a Yellow , who reveals his darkest
secrets because he assumes that everyone is interested; or like a
Green, who can be personal, but only in small groups and in a
controlled environment.
A Blue doesn’t need small talk. He can easily give the impression
that he doesn ’t care about other people, because he doesn’t
cultivate any relationships. Sure, he cares, but his needs are on a
different level than everyon e else’s. He likes being in his own
company and with immediate family .
The conseque nce is clear for those around him: They find him
coldhearted and distant. That personal bubble is obvious,  and it can
be very chilly , particularly for Yellows and Greens. And so they call
their Blue friend a bore. Blues can easily make us feel ill at ease.
“Why is he so cold and dismissive? Doesn’t he care about me at
all?”
“ B e t t e r  S a f e  T h a n  S o r r y .  T h i n k  A b o u t  i t — P r e f e r a b l y  T h r e e  T i m e s . ”
A good family friend couldn’t leave her house without first
checking to see if her keys were really in her handbag, even though
placing them there was the last thing she had done before going to
the front door .
Back in the 1980s, when I worked as a teller in the bank, I served
people who had waited thirty minutes in line for just one single

[PAGE 105]
reason: to check that the balance printed on the ATM receipt really
was correct. Much anticipation. The same computer . The same
balance. But you never know . Best to check. And double-check. If a
triple check had been possible, they would have done it.
Where does this need for control come from? Why can’t Blues
trust what other people say or just accept the information they hear?
Answer: They can, of course. But if they also check themselves, then
all the risks will be eliminated, right? But the fact remains that they
don’t trust others. Everythin g has to be confirmed. And recorded,
and documented properly .
Remember , we’re talking here about behavior as perceived by
others. A Blue checks everything one extra time because it’s
possible to check everything one extra time. When everything has
been confirmed, then you just have to make a decision.
I have a good friend who uses Excel diligently . But not like the
rest of us. This guy has a special method. He writes a formula and
inserts all the data. Before he sends any important files to his senior
managers, he does a control check of everything using a calculator .
Why does he do that?! If you were to explain this to a Red, he
would declare that guy an absolute idiot. Explain it to a Yellow and
he would laugh himself to death. Any Blue will understand  the whole
thing immediately . There is a theoretical possibility that there could
be errors in Excel. Even though he has typed the formu la himself,
something may still go wrong. Better to be on the safe side.
How do others perceive this? Read on!
“ T h e  O n l y  T h i n g  I  C a n  T r u s t  I s  M y s e l f  a n d  M y  O w n  E y e s . ”
The guy who questions Excel has, of course, a problem
explaining himself. Many people around him have their views about
his method of always having to double-check and triple-check
everything he does himself and everything everyone else does. They
get furious when he, throug h his actions, clearly shows that he
doesn’t trust them.
The other tiny little problem is that everything takes a terribly long
time. This can be managed by working more hours. What’ s more

[PAGE 106]
problematic is the way relationships can suffer because of this habit.
How demoralizing is it when you go up to someone to tell him about
a possible breakthrough and the first thing the person does is isolate
all the different components  and call into question every single
point?
Of course, if everyone looks long enough they will find mistakes.
Nor is it even sufficient to be right. You have to prove yourself to a
Blue. If he considers you an authority in a particular field, he’ll be
better at listening to you. The road, however , can be tricky .
I’ve held many training cours es and lectures on this subje ct, and
if there are people who ask complicated questions they’re usually
engineers, technical sales staff, or financial controllers. Maybe a
handful of tax lawyers. Often times their color is Blue, and they’re not
impressed with me. Just because I have made my living doing this
for twenty years doesn’t mean I know what I’m talking about.
(Remember the woman who was accused of being a perfectionist.)
The only thing you can do is accept that among these people, the
standard of proof will be much higher . Facts always remain, as we
know: If I have prepared well enough I can prove that what I am
saying is true. In time, they will trust me.

[PAGE 107]
9
Learning New Things
How to Use What Y ou’ve Learned
Learning something new isn’t always the easiest of tasks. It may
seem simple, but it’s not easy. There’ s always so much to do, so
much to read, and so much to learn. Where do you start? This is
almost always determined by your personal interests. Naturally , it’s
easier to devote more time to what you’re curious abou t and what
you’re interested in. Nothing strange there.
For me, it was hearing Sture ’s assessment of people—his thesis
on all the idiots  at the start of this book—that became the impetus for
me to learn about people and how we relate to one another . But it’s
taken me many years to acquire this knowledge. I’ve read books,
attended training, and been certified many times in dif ferent subjects.
Furthermore, I’ve led thousan ds of courses on the subject. So now,
as a middle-aged man, I believe I have a decent grasp on how
people function. But, in all probability , I’ve only scratched the
surface.
If We Had Endless Time, There’d Be No Problem
All of this learning has taken time. Maybe I don’t have the natural
instinct that many others have. I don’t really know . But I do know a
bit about teaching methods and how we learn new thing s. And for
me, it’s difficult to think of any subject more important than people.
No matter what job you have, where life may take you—you are
going to meet other people.

[PAGE 108]
For example, you can be:
•  an employee with work colleagues
•  a seller with customers
•  a project manager who leads people with different expe rtise
than your own
•  a managing director with employees
•  a middle manager with people both above and below you in
the organization
•  a self-emplo yed entrepren eur finding your own sales and
orders
•  a parent with teenagers in the household
•  a spouse
•  a coach for the football team
•  a chairperson of the local home and school associations
There’ s no limitation to how this knowledge can be applied.
Understanding people will always remain a crucial factor in achieving
your goals in life as smooth ly as possible, no matter what these
goals are.
Take a look at the diagram on the next page. This isn’t a new
model, but it says a lot about how theoretical knowledge is
transformed into real competence. Reading a book is one thing—I’m
glad that you are reading this one. It’s a great way to kick off your
own learning, but it’ s only the first step in learning something.

[PAGE 109]
A New Approach
My mission is clear—I want more people to understand this method
of classifying behavior . So much conflict could be avoided if we just
understood why the people around us behave the way they do. I
have nothing against conflict; it usually doesn’t bother me, because I
know how to handle it. But when people tear down and destroy more
than they build up, I believe that we should be able to find other
ways forward. Life consists of so much more than learning  from your
mistakes. Some mistakes you can avoid altogether .
A Language like Any Other Language
The “language” this book discusses—DISA-language IPD (the
Institute for Personal Development) which is the official name—
works like any other language when it comes to learning . If you’ve

[PAGE 110]
ever studied Spanish or German in schoo l, then you know what I’m
talking about. To study for your exams is one thing. To be able to
really speak fluently is a different matter . It’s not enough to refresh
your knowledg e once a year just before a trip to Spain. If you really
want to be able to speak Spanish (more than just orderin g food at a
restaurant) whenever you run into a Spanish speaker , you need to
practice. It’ s a perishable commodity . There are no shortcuts.
Of course, after reading this book you can go out into the world
and happily experiment with the people you meet. I advise  you to do
so. In the beginning, the challenge will be that you’re going to guess
incorrectly about people’ s personalities and that may result in a
certain degree of embarrassm ent. But as you become more “fluent”
in the language of behavior , it will transform how you interact with the
people around you.

[PAGE 111]
1 0
Body Language: Why How You Move
Matters
How Do Y ou Really Look?
Introduction
Different colors exhibit different types of body language. In
addition to all things you say and do, you project a certain type of
body language to the people around you. People pick up on this
body language  and use it to interpret your mood. So let’s take a
closer look at how we move.
“Body language” refers to all forms of nonverbal communication,
conscious as well as unconscious. Differences in body language
vary both between individuals and between different groups of
people. Our body language also functions as a social and cultural
marker , even if there are common biological foundations.
The modern English language contains about one hundred and
seventy thousa nd words, of which five thousand are used regularly .
In comparison, according to certain scholars, body language
contains almost seven hundred thousand signals. Yes, we can
debate the exact numbers, but that’s not the point. Just understand
that there are an immense number of signals, more than we may be
aware of.
I’m not going to examine all these signals, but it’s still interesting
to see what the differences are between different behavior profiles.

[PAGE 112]
Just remember , our state of mind, situation, and whether we feel
safe or unsafe can have a crucial influence on our body language.
Posture
If on the one hand, you have a relaxed, natural but not slack posture,
other people often get the impression that you are self-confidence. If
on the other hand, you have a shrunken posture, it can be
interpreted as resignation and disappointment. If you have an erect,
somewhat wooden posture, people can believe that this is a signal of
dominance; in other words, you demand respect from those around
you. However , it could also be an indication that you were trained at
a military academy .
Gaze
We use our eyes for many different things. Shifty eyes generally
suggest that the person in question would rather be somewhere
else. Other people meet your gaze steadily , without even blinking.
This creates a totally different impression. It’s said that liars can’t
look you in the eye and they often shift their gaze to the side. But
since this is commonly known even among liars, the worst of them
have learned to stare you straight in the eyes when they are lying.
So nothing is that obvious. (Someone who is repeatedly touching his
neck is more often an indicat or of a liar.) When something is awful or
unpleasant, many lift their hands up to their faces. And when you
need to think, you often close your eyes for a while.
Head and Face
When speaking, we usually either nod or shake our heads,
depending on whether we agree or not. When we listen extra
carefully to a discussion, we can lean our heads to one side.
Hanging your head or wrinkling your forehead can signal sadness or
depression. When we’re amazed at something, we often raise our
eyebrows, while we turn up our noses at things we aren’t fond of. In

[PAGE 113]
your face alone forty-three different muscles are concealed, and
these can be combined in countless ways.
Hands
Yes, this is a true classic. When greeting a person, how hard do you
really have to shake his hand? A simple handshake can reveal a lot
about a person. Limp and feeble handshakes often indicate a
submissive behavior , so if you have such a handshake it might be a
good idea to press a little harder . If a handshake is firm it probably
suggests that a person is determined. Anyone who squeezes way
too hard belongs more than likely to the former category  but would
prefer to belong to the latter . Clenched fists rarely mean good news,
usually indicating aggressiveness. Certain nervous people pick at
their clothes, removing hairs  or threads. This often indicates they
would rather focus their attention on other things. Holding your
hands clasped behind your back often expresses power and
security .
Remember what I just said about lies? A more effective  way to
spot a liar is to notice if he puts the palm of his hand on his chest—
preferably his right hand over his heart—and sighs indignantly when
he’s been accused of lying. “Would I lie? How can you say that about
me?” This gesture is intended to strengthen his honest intentions,
but it immediately puts those around on their guard, because it is so
unnecessary and excessive. There’ s definitely something fishy going
on there.
Territory
It’s very important that all people have their own persona l space, as
everyone need s an area that is his own. Among other things, this
territory can be the distance you maintain from people when you’re
speaking to them. The perso nal zone is generally a few feet and the
social zone is three to ten feet. When we speak about the personal
zone we mean the space when two people who know each other are

[PAGE 114]
communicating. “The social zone” refers to the space between
strangers who are communic ating. But this is very much dependent
on the culture of the speake rs. In the Nordic European region, for
example, the personal zone is definitely larger than what someone
from the Mediterranean would have.
So What Do We Do About All This?
How do the various forms of behavior differ from one another? It’s
obvious that some “well-known” facts about body language don’t
apply to every single person.  Someone who is busily picking lint off
his sleeve might be bored or he might just be nervous. Another
example is how people deal with uncertainty . A Green who is unsure
leans backwards. A Red who is unsure leans forward, as his way of
dealing with this uncertainty is to try to dominate the conversation.
On the following pages, I’ve listed further example s of the
differences. Try observing people in real life to see if you can find
any of the following forms of behavior . But remember , body language
is very individual. Sure, there  are the general expressions that apply
throughout the entire world and among all people—a contemptuous
stare, for example, looks similar in every country—but there are so
many differenc es that you’ll have to study your fellow mortals to
sharpen your ability . The following short sections are intended to
serve as a simple guide.
R e d  B o d y  L a n g u a g e
Some basics to keep in mind about Reds. They:
•  keep their distance from others
•  have powerful handshakes
•  lean forward aggressively
•  use direct eye contact
•  use controlling gestures.
As I mentioned previously , Reds often have a clear and distinctive
body language. Y ou can usually recognize a Red from a distance.

[PAGE 115]
When you walk through large crowds, you’ll see people swarming
around, standing still, conver sing with others, or just checking to see
what all the fuss is about. Let’s say that you’re looking at a town
square teeming  with people. If you look really closely , you will see a
person who is crossing the square at a brisk pace completely
disregarding the people standing in his way. With his gaze fixed on a
point a bit in front of him, the Red speeds up and crosses the square
without any problem. He does not give way but makes others move
aside. His steps are decisive and powerful. He expects the rest of us
to get out of his way .
The first time you meet a Red, he usually maintains a certain
distance. His handshake won’t be hearty , but it will be powerful.
Expect that the Red—man or woman—will grip a little bit harder to
show who is in charge. (Some people consider this alpha male
behavior , but it also occur s in women. A Red has a need to
demonstrate that he is someone to be reckoned with.)
Forget overexuberant smiles. His face can be downright grim,
especially if you’re attending a business meeting. But even in social
settings, Reds maintain some reserve. A Red won’t give you a big
bear hug (as long as he is sober; under the influence of alcohol,
anything can happen).
When things start getting tense—which usually happens rather
quickly when Reds are involved—this guy will lean across the table
and argue his case quite forcefully . Eye contact will be very direct,
his gaze fixed on you. When it comes to the language of power ,
Reds have their finger on the trigger right from the start. Be prepared
for that.
Also, be prepared for a relatively limited use of gestures, but
those gestures that do surface can be controlling and aggressive.
Reds point at people very readily. The notion that it is rude to point at
people isn’t something that particularly worries him. It’s also common
that Reds point at you by stretching out their hand toward s you with
the palm facing down. If you want to give this a try, ask someone to
point at you that way , and then think about how it feels.

[PAGE 116]
You can also clearly see that Reds—of course they are not alone
in this—are more than willing  to interrupt you. They draw their breath
continuously , hoping to find gaps in the conversation. If they have to
wait too long to speak, they’ll  throw themselves into the conversation
with a loud voice and simply take over .
V O I C E
What about a Red’s tone of voice? It’s often strong. We hear
these people clearly becau se they think nothing of raising their
voices to make themselves heard—as much as it takes. Of course,
even Reds can be nervous and worried about things, but usually you
won’t hear this. Their voices won’t tremble that much.
This is one of the secret s Reds have. No matter what’ s
happening behind the façade, Reds will sound convincing. No
stammer , no hesitation. Finger on the trigger . If we don’t listen, they
will repeat it one more time, but louder . In the end, they always get
through.
S P E E D  I N  S P E E C H  A N D  D E E D
As I mentioned earlier , Reds are always in a hurry . Quick equals
good. Normally , this even applies to speech and actions. Everything
happens at a furious pace. Because speed is the factor many Reds
measure succe ss by, it will be all go. And a couple of sharp changes
when the course needs adjusting.
Y e l l o w  B o d y  L a n g u a g e
Some simple basics to keep in mind about Y ellows. They:
•  are tactile
•  are relaxed and jocular
•  show friendly eye contact
•  use expressive gestures
•  often come close.
A Yellow’s body language is often very open and inviting. Smiles
appear constantly , even when  there’ s not much to smile about. They

[PAGE 117]
joke around a lot and can be very relaxed. When visiting a neighbor
he doesn’t know that well, a Yellow may just stretch out on the sofa.
But this is typical for Yellows. When a Yellow feels secure in any
given situation, you can see it. He’ s like an open book.
The similarity with Red behavior lies primarily in the tempo.
Yellows move quickly and quite distinctively . They often  radiate a
strong self-confidence.
Personal space is a relative thing for Yellows. While some colors
don’t like having people sit too close to them, Yellows will willingly
move up very close. Yellows can spontaneously start hugging
every one around them. Man or woman, it doesn’t really matter . It
depends on what the feeling and the mood are that day .
It’s not uncommon for others  to recoil when this happens , which
Yellows find very trying. But it’s not just that Yellows like hugging. It
can also be a simple form of physical contact. A hand placed on an
arm, a pat on the leg—with no ulterior motive. The Yellow just wants
to reinforce what he’s said. What a Yellow perceives as something
natural and spontaneous others can perceive as an invitation. And of
course, it can end badly .
In general, with Yellows there will be jokes all round and
countless smiles. Eye contact is no problem; it’s intense, cheerful,
and friendly .
V O I C E
A Yellow’s tone of voice deno tes a strong commitment from start
to finish . You hear it from afar: Laughter , fun, intensity . Enthusiasm.
Joy. Energy .
Generally spea king, Yellows show empathy very clearly . They’re
with you either 100 percent or not at all. And this can be heard in
their voice. It goes up and down; it changes tempo, vigor , and
intensity . Yellows often have a powerful melody in their way of
speaking.
No matter what emotion has seized the Yellow at the moment, it
will be noticeable in his voice.

[PAGE 118]
S P E E D  I N  S P E E C H  A N D  D E E D
Tempo. Not quite the same rate of action as Reds,  but a
decidedly fast pace. Have you met anyone who, when in a hurry to
say something, kind of stumbles over his words? Only half of them
really come out as they should. You can surmise what is being said,
but sometimes  it’s incomprehensible. These are Yellows whose
mouths simply can’t keep up with everything they have to say .
G r e e n  B o d y  L a n g u a g e
Some simple basics to keep in mind about Greens. They:
•  are relaxed and come close
•  act methodically
•  tend to lean backwards
•  use very friendly eye contact
•  prefer small-scale gestures.
Greens are often—but not always—sluggish in body movement.
When they’re completely harmonious, they have a relaxed body
language that exudes calm and confidence. No impetuous
movements, no sudden tossing of their heads or hands. Nice and
easy.
Their gestures are often less flamboyant and well suited for
smaller groups . Greens don’t feel at ease in larger groups, so they
become more closed and will appear reserved. Greens often have
body language that gives them away . They try to hide their true
feelings but don’t always succeed. If they’re out of balan ce or feel
uncomfortable, it will be visible.
When sitting around a table, you can expect that Greens will tend
to lean backwards. This is something of a paradox, as they don’t
really have a problem getting  close to people. Just like Yellows, they
like to touch others. It’s fine as long as they know the person they
are touching. Beware, however , of touching a Green who hasn’t
given a clear sign that he knows you well enough. It’s easy to cross
the line. They can be protective of their personal space.

[PAGE 119]
You often notic e when a Red walks across a room. Since Greens
are the compl ete opposite of Reds in many things, I can say that
Greens make discretion a point of honor . It’s not uncommon that
they try to make themselves invisible.
The reason? They don’t want to be the center of attention.
Greens almos t always have friendly faces. If not, then they’re
quite neutral. Don’t expect any exaggerated smiles or overexuberant
greetings. A little expectant, that’s it. But the difference will be huge if
a Green knows you. If he thinks that you are good friends, he can be
very intimate and friendly . If he feels that you have just met each
other , well then, you just have to wait.
Let Greens come to you. Do not force yourself on them. In time,
when they trust you, they’ll relax and become more natural.
V O I C E
A Green’ s voice will never be strong; it’s not likely that he will
drown out the group. You’ll have to make a little bit more effort. Even
when Greens speak in front of a larger group (they may do this, if
they don’t have  any choice), they’ll speak as if there were only three
of you sitting around the table. Sometimes it may appear that Greens
don’t see the other hundred people in the room. The volume is
generally low , and it can be dif ficult to hear what they say .
But their voice will always be soft and radiate warmth. The pace
will be slower and the variation not at all like when a Y ellow speaks.
S P E E D  I N  S P E E C H  A N D  D E E D
Generally , Greens have a slower pace than Reds and Yellows but
not quite as slow as Blues. Speed has no value in itself. If a
heightened tempo risks destroying the cooperation in the group,
Greens will reduce the speed . It doesn’t matter what the deadline is.
The most important thing is always going to be how people feel.
B l u e  B o d y  L a n g u a g e
Some simple basics to keep in mind about Blues. They:
•  prefer to keep others at a distance

[PAGE 120]
•  either stand or sit
• often have closed body language
•  use direct eye contact
•  speak without gestures.
The easiest way to describe a Blue’ s body language is to say that
he has none. Okay , maybe that is a bit simplistic. What I mean is that
there’ s not that much to interpret in a Blue. Neither his face nor his
body gives much away . When I speak about body language to
salespeople, they usually remark that some people are impossible to
interpret. When  I ask if these are people who sit almost perfectly still
without moving even a muscle in their faces, they usually nod and
think this is remarkable.
They’re probably talking about Blues. A person who doesn’t
exhibit much movement or even temperament reveals nothing. In
this case, it’s the lack of distinctive body language that tells us what
we need to know .
Many Blues can make very dramatic statements with an
expressionless face. I once heard a blue manager say that the
department was to close and that we had to agree on a
decommissioning plan for three hundred employees. Not a muscle in
his face moved unnecessarily .
This is what gives people the idea that Blues lack feelings, but
this is, naturally , not true. Let me remind you again that a Blue is an
introvert, which is to say, most of his emotions simply operate
beneath the surface.
It also works the other way. Once, many years ago, I saw a lady
win a half a million dollars on television. Behind the camera her
husband was heard screamin g for joy, while the lady herself sat very
still with a cool smile. The host smiled and waved his arms around,
and for a while you had to wonder who had actually won. But the
lady herself said nothing more than “Thank you, this was nice.” She
hardly moved at all. I don’t think it was because she was already a
million aire; it was because she was Blue. This is simply the way it

[PAGE 121]
works. Beneath the surface, I assume that she was delighted with
her winnings, but she didn’t show it outwardly . One day I will call the
channel and ask if they still have the recording, because it’s such a
vivid illustration.
When you see Blues speak ing in front of larger groups, this
tendency becomes very evident. Just like Greens, they have no
need to be the center of attention. The difference, however , is that
while a Green would like to sink through the floor, a Blue will remain
standing. He’ll try to whip up the masses while standing completely
motionless with a fixed face.
Another clue is that Blues require a relatively large amount of
personal space  around them. They often feel more comfortable by
keeping others  at a distance.  Naturally , it depends on how well they
know each other , but this zone is significantly larger than it is for
Yellows, for instance.
If others come too close, Blues’ body language becomes closed.
Both arms and legs will be crossed, indicating that they’re keeping
their distance.
As I mentioned earlier , Blues move less than others. When they
stand, they stand still. There’ s not that much swaying and walking.
They can very easily stand in the same spot for a whole hour while
giving a lecture. When they sit down, they remain seate d more or
less in the same position all the time.
Consequently , they won’t use too many gestures. Imagine a
Yellow: a really outgoing and dynamic figure—and now think the
opposite. Take away all movements that aren’t needed (most of
them, according to Blues) and you begin to get the picture. Stone-
faced, as someone once described it.
However , Blues normally look others straight in the eyes. They
have no problem with eye contact, even if it makes others
uncomfortable.
V O I C E
Though not exactly weak, a Blue’ s voice is restrained and
subdued. They don’t make much of a fuss about themselves. Their

[PAGE 122]
impression tends to be controlled. It’s common for them to sound
very pensive, as if weighing every word before it’s allowed to see the
light of day .
Generally , there’ s little or no variation in a Blue’ s voice. He
sounds more or less the same all the time—whether he’s reading the
TV Guide  or giving his acceptance speech to the nation after winnin g
the presidentia l election. Without much rhythm or melody , he just
continues to say what’ s on the script.
Musicians tend to have difficulty with this. They think everything a
Blue says flows badly .
S P E E D  I N  S P E E C H  A N D  D E E D
Slow . At least if we compare it to others’. If we take a Red or even
a Yellow, he’ll speak at the speed of sound. A Blue has a completely
different pace. It will take as long as it takes. Speed is of no interest.

[PAGE 123]
1 1
A Real-Life Example: The Company
Party—How to Understand Everyone
You Meet
Many years ago, I used to work in the banking sector . It was an
interesting job in many ways , though it could be a little humdrum at
times. Howeve r, I learned a lot by meeting many different types of
people, and I have many stories of funny customer meetings from
that period. The most interesting insights, however , I gained behind
the scenes.
One of the more startling experiences was at a branch where I
was working in the 1990s. A series of behavior stereotypes were
working there. Some of them were obvious in their behavioral
profiles. We had incredibly distinctive Blues and equally obvious
Greens and Y ellows. And, of course, a Red boss.
One spring we’d been worki ng incredibly hard, many had been
out sick, and we were under pressure from customers. People were
tired, irritated, and touchy . We really needed some good news. The
person who got fed up with all the hard work first was one of the
Yellow advisors. One day , she came into the lunchroom and said that
she’d had enough of all our grumpy faces. We needed something
fun to do, and she knew exactly what.
It was time to find a goal,  something to look forward to. A
company party would save the day! Full of enthusiasm, she told us

[PAGE 124]
that she’d seen  a very nice conference center nearby where all of us
could go for a weekend to have a good rest. They had a stunning
spa and gym, snazzy hotel rooms, and a trendy restauran t that was
truly a la mode. In addition, she knew the owner through a friend of a
friend and could probably get a bargain price on the whole package.
She just wanted to know what we thought about the idea.
At first, we all stared at her, not knowing if the whole thing was for
real, because we suspected that she probably didn’t know the owner
at all. With a broad smile, she continued to speak, talking about all
the fun we could have: We could play games, organize some friendly
competitions, enjoy bubble baths, and, of course, have a monster
party in the evening.
A lively discussion began, and several of us thought the idea
sounded great. The Red bank director looked around and saw that
his employees  liked the idea. Thankfully , he was keen on the idea.
We were tired and worn out, and he wanted to show his appreciation
for our commitm ent. He made the decision right there and then. After
a five-minute discussion, he declared that there would be a party and
he promised to foot the bill.
He looked at the Yellow woman who had suggested the party and
asked if she was prepared to organize everything. Make the
necessary calls and book everything. She immediately began to
deliver a long harangue that was nothing more than one big
smokescreen to hide the fact that she thought she had done her bit
by coming up with the idea. The Red boss silenced her with a wave
of his hand. A few Green colleagues were sitting behind  him on a
corner of the sofa, the same corner where they always sat. The boss
didn’t even need to turn around to be able to call them by name. He
asked each of them if they would help. They all agreed without really
knowing what he’d asked. The Red boss nodded briefly and left the
room. He was done. As he stood up, he forgot about the matter
immediately .
Excitement burst forth, and everyone with Red and Yellow in their
behavior profiles began exclaiming about the party , all talking at the

[PAGE 125]
same time. The Yellow advisor was extremely enthusiastic and
continued to sell the idea, despite the fact that the decision had
already been made. Her proposals for the type of party we should
have became wilder and wilder . I remember that she started with a
black-tie ball and had come all the way to a toga party before
someone managed to silence her .
However , one person sat silently in the corner . Our Blue credit
manager was very concerned . When everything calmed down a bit,
he said with a loud voice, “But how are we supposed to get there?”
The only thing  he had heard  about the whole affair was that the
conference center was twen ty miles outside of town, and now the
problems were stacking up. We were faced with a significant
logistical challe nge. Should we go by car? Or taxi? Or had the bank
planned to charter a bus? How would this actually be done? Endless
obstacles were lining up. He crossed his arms and clenched his
teeth.
The Yellow woman erupted and tore into him right away . How
could he be so negative? Here she was after coming with the best
idea in the world and he immediately spoiled the whole  thing with
umpteen trying questions. Maybe he should come up with his own
ideas for once ? How did he think we should get there?  He didn’t
have an answer; he just pointed out that there were lots of options.
He couldn’t make any decision or have an opinion. He only knew
that the whole idea was poorly thought out.
The Greens saved the day by saying that they were willing to take
their cars and pick everyone  up. Five cars should be enough, and
they promised to arrange everything. This announcement calmed the
discussion down a little, and the Yellow woman could feel like a
winner again. Her party had just been saved.
Everyone looked forward to the party , but the Yellow advisor
never showed up; she had accidentally double-booked that day.
There must have been a wedding on that same weekend.  Or maybe
a relativ e was turning fifty. As a matter of fact, it might have been
both.

[PAGE 126]
What Happens at a Company Party When No One Is
Paying Attention
Once the party started, exciting things happened. We all know that
alcohol affects  people. We also know that different people are
affected in different ways. Nothing strange so far. If we ignore for a
moment that the amount of alcohol consumed is an important factor
and assume that we’re just talking about moderate drinking and that
no one will drive their cars that night, we can see some interesting
patterns.
We had several Yellows in our branch. The four sellers who dealt
with private customers were very Yellow . They were jovial, positive
entertainers right from the outset. They needed no alcohol before
daring to “loosen up” and become approachable. In fact, you could
easily get the impression that they always were a bit tipsy, because
they had that frolicsome energy . They saw life as one long
celebration that should always be funny and amusing.
But the interes ting thing is that Yellows who drink can lose some
of this. During  the company party , I observed that three of the four
Yellow salespeople became more and more silent as the evening
went on. As the intake of certain beverages increase d and the
atmosphere became more intense, they withdrew . I remember one of
the guys sat down on the steps outside with a wineglass in his hand.
I asked  him what was the matter. He was moody and philosophical.
What was the point of it all? Why did he go the extra mile? No one
ever really thanked him for it. Perhaps the best thing to do was to
resign. My cheerful colleague  had been transformed into a brooding
pessimist.
Funnily enough , I found the Blue credit manager inside the party
venue dancing on the table while telling dirty jokes. Never before nor
since have I heard such dirty jokes. When I asked his colleagues
what he had been drinking, they shrugged their shoulders and said
that he always behaved like that when he got started. If I had met

[PAGE 127]
him for the first time that night, I would have thought that he was one
of the Y ellows at our workplace.
It was as if Yellows and the Blues had completely switched
personalities. You could conclude that a really good party consists of
sober Y ellows and Blues who are slightly under the influence.
However , thing s became really interesting when I found our Red
bank director , who normally  was quite stern. He had a glass of
whisky in his hand and was standing there speaking to the Green
group of administrators. He explained, a little ambiguously I hasten
to add, that he really wasn’t a horrible person and that he liked them
very much. When he lost his temper at the office, they shouldn’t take
it personally; he meant no offense, and they didn’t need to be afraid
of him.
The six Greens, two men and four women, who had been
drinking as well, all spoke up and gave him a piece of their minds.
They were irritated by his behavior and explained that he was the
worst boss they’d ever had. Each of them had been working in the
office for at least twenty years and when he was gone they would
still be there, and what did he think about that? They back ed him into
a corner and gave him a proper dressing-down. The Red boss fled
the field and was the first to leave the party .
Even the Reds and the Gree ns had changed behavior with each
other in some strange way! I left the party with an extraordinary
insight—alcohol changes people, but exactly how they change is
even more interesting.
However , back  in the office on Monday , everything was back to
normal. The Yellows told their latest jokes, and the Blue guy did not
say a word. The boss glowe red at everyone, and the Greens just
stared at the wall when he showed up. Order was restored.
Again, I cannot prove this, so you simply have to do your own
research. Challenge your pals late on a Friday night and you’ll
understand exactly what I mean. Just take it easy with the alcohol.

[PAGE 128]
1 2
Adaptation
How to Handle Idiots (i.e., Everyone Who Isn’t like Y ou)
Now let’s now take a look at how we can adapt to one another in
order to work together . A man once said (admittedly with an ironic
smile on his face, but still) that the test of intelligence is simple: “If
you agree with me, then you’re intelligent. However , if you don’t
agree with me, then you are clearly and undoubtedly an idiot.”
I assume that you’re intellige nt enough to interpret this message
correctly . But seriously—all of us have wondered why some people
don’t understand anything. As I said in the introduction, when I was
young I was often struck by the fact that people who appear to be
very intelligent  could, at the same time, be such comp lete idiots.
They didn’t see what I saw. Some people delicately say that such
individuals lack the right “intellectual elasticity ,” but that’s only
because they’re too well bred to let the word “idiot” come out of their
mouths.
People Are Obviously Different. So What Do You Do
About It?
How should we handle peop le who are different from us when they
react and function in completely different ways? Can you take on
various kinds of personalities in different situations? An interesting
question. If it were possible to behave 100 percent like a chameleon
—completely changing your behavior depending on whom you’re
with—would it be a good idea to try? It’s natural for us to be who we

[PAGE 129]
are, to exhibit our own core behavior . But for a variety of reasons, we
can feel the need to adapt to those around us. There’ s often a lot of
talk about how we must be flexible and adaptable so that we can
cope with a wide variety of situations and are able to respond to
many different types of people. The term has even been given a
name—EI (emotional intelligence) or EQ (emotional quotient). To
cope with this constant need  for adaptation, it’s important that we’re
aware that adaptation demands ef fort and takes a lot of energy .
Our natural condition is to exhibit our core behavior . Our
“unnatural” behavior is to continually adapt to others, and this
requires ability , training, and energy . If we’re uncertain as to what is
“right” in a situation, if we’re  untrained or lack sufficient energy to
cope with the role that we currently believe is the right one, we will
be frightened, hesitant, and often stressed. As a result, we lose even
more energy and our core behavior becomes increasingly visible—
often to the great surprise of those around us, who are used to
seeing us behave in a certain way .
In a Perfect World
In the best of worlds, everyone can be themselves and everything
functions smoothly from the word go. Everyone agrees at all times
and conflicts don’t exist at all. This place is said to exist, and it’s
called Utopia. But it’s not that simple. As I said at the beginning of
this book, if you think that you can change everyone else, you’ll be
very disappoin ted. It would surprise me if you could chan ge anyone
at all.
No matter who you are—R ed, Yellow , Green, or Blue, or a
combination of multiple colors—you will always be in the minority .
Most of the people you encounter will be different from you. No
matter how well balanced you are, you can’t be all the types at the
same time. So you have to adapt to the people you meet. Good
communication is often a matter of adapting to others.
But wait a minute, you might  be thinking. That isn’t true. I can be
myself. In fact, I never adap t myself for anyone, anytime, and it’s

[PAGE 130]
gone very well. It’ s taken me this far in life.
Absolutely .
Naturally , everyone can start with themselves. That’ s not a
problem. But then, don’t expect to get through to other people with
the message you’re trying to share. If you can live knowing that most
of the people you meet won’t buy what you say, well, then you don’t
have a problem.
You Already Do This, Even If You Don’t Think You Do
You already adapt your behavior , even if you don’t realize it. We all
adapt to one another all the time. It’s part of the social game, the
visible and invisible communi cation that is constantly in progress. I’m
just proposing a more reliabl e system. You don’t have to gamble or
guess. You can make the right adjustment from the beginning. But
please note: usually . No system is perfect.
Some people I meet don’t like the idea of deliberately adapting to
others. They consider it dishonest and manipulative. But again, you
can always abstain.
An Example from Real Life
I’m going to tell you a true story about a man I met during  a training
conference many years ago, a likeable and very popu lar private
entrepreneur who achieved great success in his field. This man—let
us call him Adam—was extremely Yellow , a real visionary with
ambitious plans that were only occasionally put into ef fect.
Adam had never thought about or reflected on how he behaved
as a person or how he was perceived by others. There had never
been any reason to. Someo ne had persuaded him to come to this
conference, and he didn’t really know what he was getting himself
into.
The topic that day was the same as this book; it was a full-day
workshop where we worked on how to understand different behavior
profiles. After the lunch break, I saw that something was troubling

[PAGE 131]
Adam. His face was serious, and his body language had become
very closed. When I started talking again and explaining the various
profiles, he sank deeper and deeper into his chair , and it was
obvious to me that he was thinking about something else.
I asked what was troubling him.
There was an explosion. He exclaimed, “This is wrong! How
could I categor ize people like that? Put people into a theoretical grid
system?” It turned out that he didn’t like the idea of adapting to other
types of people, but not because he thought that everyone had to
adapt to him. No, what worried him was that he saw it as a way to
manipulate others and he didn’t like it. Didn’t like it at all, in fact.
Everyone wondered what the real problem was. Adam believed
that you couldn’t categorize people this way. That using a lot of
models was just wrong. He thought that it was highly dangerous not
to go on pure feeling.
Someone in the group made it clear to him that he of all people
should listen, since he was the one who attracted conflict. The
debate was soon in full swing, and after thirty minutes I had to call a
time-out.
I can understand Adam’ s concern, and I respect the fact that he
raised the issue. What worried him was that it wouldn’t work: If
everyone adap ted to one another , no one would be them selves any
longer . In his way of thinking,  that would be the greatest deception—
not to be yourself.
There’ s somet hing in what he said. At the same time, of course,
you can always choose how much or little you modulate your
behavior . The more you learn about other people, the easier it
becomes for you to make decisions. Join in the game, or go your
own way? The decision will always be yours.
Furthermore, Adam was also deeply resentful that I, as a
specialist in the field, could describe him in quite some detail and
give examples of how I thoug ht he was wired. When he looked at the
assessment tool that describes an individual, he went completely
silent.

[PAGE 132]
Ultimately , after we sat down and discussed the matter Adam
came to under stand the role and benefits of behavior assessment.
But he taught me to be careful with how I use this knowledge.
How Often Do We Follow a System Without Knowing
If It Works?
No system is perfect. There are always exceptions. This is just one
piece in the jigsaw puzzle of human life. It’s certainly a large and
important piece, but it’ s far from the whole picture.
I’ve divided up the sections on adaptation into two parts for each
color . The first part deals with what you need to do to interact
meaningfully with another person—when you really want to get
through to him and put him in a cheerful mood and make him feel
that you understand him. The second part deals with how you get
people to take your side. What each profile wants in a situation isn’t
necessarily the best thing to do to make progress.
You can do a great deal of good—if you choose to do so.
Adapting to Red Behavior
W h a t  a  R e d  E x p e c t s  o f  Y o u
“ D O  W H A T  I  A S K E D  O F  Y O U ,  A S  Q U I C K L Y  A S  P O S S I B L E — P R E F E R A B L Y ,
E V E N  F A S T E R  T H A N  T H A T ”
If you ask a Red, he’ll agree that most people are too slow. They
speak too slowly , they have trouble coming to the point , and they
work ineffectively . In a Red’s world, everything simply takes way too
long.
Remember what I told you about impatience in Red behavior ,
about their constant pursuit of (fast) results. When other people turn
things over in their minds from morning to night, it drives a Red
crazy .
Thought and action are one. It has to be done quickly . If there’ s
anything Reds dislike, it’ s endless discussion. It makes them flip out.

[PAGE 133]
Conclusion:  If you want to adapt to a Red’s tempo—hurry up!
Speed up! Speak and act more quickly . Look at the clock often,
because that’s what a Red does. If you can conclude a meeting in
half the time—do it! If you have a Red with you in the car, he won’t
be upset if you’re a little bit over the speed limit. (If you drive too
slowly , he might insist on taking the steering wheel.)
“ D O  Y O U  W A N T  S O M E T H I N G ?  S P E A K  U P ! ”
As you now know , Reds are very much to the point, and they
enjoy being with other people who also have the ability to tell them
what they want—quickly . If you have a tendency to go around in
circles before getting to the crux of the matter , you’ll have difficulty
getting through  to a Red. He’ll get tired if you waste your words
without due cause. And he knows when he’s dealing with a
chatterbox.
It’s very common for people to provide some background to a
problem before describing the problem itself. And maybe even some
more background to the solution of the problem.
Forget it. It won’t work.
Conclusion:  If you want to have a Red’s full attention, cut the
small talk. It’s vital that you’re clear and straightforward. Determine
the most essential point of your message and start there. Let’s say
that you’re going to present the latest financial statement. Say what’ s
written on the last line of the slide first—that’ s what a Red is sitting
there waiting for anyway . Then you can get into the details.
Don’t use a single word unnecessarily . But make sure you’ve
done your homework when it comes to the background. Questions
may come up. If a Red sense s that you’re uncertain, you’ll be grilled
on the facts.
Written materia ls should be concise and, above all, well laid out.
No endless dissertations written by someone who loves the sound of
his own voice. A single line jotted down on the back of the napkin will
do the job.
“ I  C O U L D N ’ T  C A R E  L E S S  W H A T  Y O U  D I D  O N  V A C A T I O N . ”

[PAGE 134]
Reds live in the present. Everything that happens is happening
here and now. They have a unique ability to focus on what’ s on the
current agenda . Thus, you need to stick to the topic when you speak
to a Red. He has no problem with creativity or new ideas; this is
always apprec iated as long as it moves you forward. But when a
Red feels that you’ve left the agenda altogether and are beginning to
fiddle-faddle, then conflict isn’t that far of f.
The most effective method for a Red is to establish what the
problem is and then just get to work. Simple, isn’t it?
Conclusion:  Stick to the topic! The easiest way is to prepare your
case very precisely before going into a meeting with a Red. If, in the
middle of an interesting discussion, another thought pops into your
head, write it down and ask at the end of the meeting if it’s okay to
raise the issue. Otherwise, schedule a new meeting.
If someone with lots of Red in his behavior asks what time it is,
answer the question with the exact time. Don’t say that there’s plenty
of time. He’ll decide that himself. And again—don’t forget to keep up
the pace. For a Red, “speed” will be synonymous with “ef ficiency .”
Now we’re talking business—never forget it. Being businesslike in
business does n’t really sound like a novel idea, but think about it. If
you’re a seller , you’ve probably attended a number of training
courses in sales where you learned that you have to build up a
relationship with the customer . Get to know him. Win him over to
your side.
This is good advice. Do it. Build relationships as much as you
deem necessary . Just don’t do it with Reds. For exam ple, if you
begin a meeting with a Red whom you’ve never met before, nothing
could be worse  than asking where he lives, where he spent his last
vacation, or what he thought of the game last night. Nothing could be
more irrelevant to him. He’s not here to chat or make friends. He’s
there to do business. Deeply Red individuals become downright
irritated and aggressive when they notice that someone is trying to
be friends with them.

[PAGE 135]
A Red is not here to be your pal. He’s only here for one reason—
to do business. He might throw you out—figuratively speaking—if he
perceives your attempts to be friendly as ingratiation or fawning. This
isn’t something he would dream of doing himself, so neither should
you.
And don’t flatte r a Red if you don’t know him well. Just leave the
compliments at home.
Conclusion:  Paradoxically , Reds are the easiest to sell to. If you
want to do good business, the only thing you need to do is step into
a Red’s office, present your suggestions, and then ask about a deal.
Skip the football game yeste rday. Never mind that you saw him in
the supermarket last week. He didn’t see you anyway . When a Red
trusts you and has decided that you’re a decent person who can be
advantageous to him, well, then he may very well start discussing
cars, boats, or the latest politics. Play ball with him. But then and
only then. And don’t be surpr ised if the meeting ends mid-sentence.
When he’s satisfied with his socializing, he concludes it instantly . It
has nothing to do with you. He’ s just tired of conversation.
“ Y O U  D O N ’ T  A C T U A L L Y  K N O W ?  T H E N  W H Y  A M  I  W A S T I N G  M Y  T I M E  W I T H
Y O U ? ”
It may sound like a contradict ion, but a Red would also like you to
be determined and direct. Although he often demands that he make
all the importa nt decisions himself, he strongly dislikes dealing with
vacillating people. Dancing the hesitation waltz does not instill trust.
Comments like “It’s hard to say,” “It depends,” or “I don’t really know
what to say” just frustrate Reds.
If you have an opinion, out with it. Reds judge you on how driven
you are. You should listen to them, of course, but you must have an
opinion of your own. Otherwi se, you’re weak, and that’s not a quality
that will win you any points.
Keep in mind that we all like people in whom we can recognize
ourselves. A Red won’t meet other Reds every day, so when he
actually does he’s pleasantly surprised. “An equal! Wonderful!” I

[PAGE 136]
have met Reds who have rubbed their hands gleefully before starting
a heated debate.
Conclusion:  Deliver  your opinion without blinking. In the end, you
might have to concede, but never sell yourself short. A Red can
rattle and rumble, stamp on the floor, raise his voice, and shake his
fist. Many people back off in the face of this behavior . It’s not
pleasant to be shouted at, is it?
Well, the worst  thing you can do is back away and let him walk all
over you. If a Red is permitted to walk over you, you lose something
very important in his eyes—respect. If he doesn’t respect you, he’ll
eat you alive. And walk over you again and again and again until you
become completely and totally marginalized. You won’t be someone
to be reckoned with in the future. A complete doormat.
The best thing you can do is place yourself in the center of the
storm, telling him that he’s wrong. When a Red discovers that you
won’t give in, he will turn in an instant. If you know what you are
talking about, that is.
Y O U  C A N  S L E E P  W H E N  Y O U ’ R E  D E A D
If you have a boss who is Red, he will work hard, maybe harder
than anyone else you’ve ever met. He will have many irons in the fire
at once , and he’ll have complete control over everything that’s
happening.
A Red can live with the fact that everything won’t be right the first
time. But he will demand that you work hard. You should be diligent
in everything; feel free to put in overtime if you can. I urge you not to
become a workaholic—life has more to offer than work—b ut from the
perceptive of a Red boss, this would be a first-class quality . He will
hold you in high esteem if he sees your commitment in the form of
hard work.
Conclusion:  Show that you work hard. You don’t need to run into
the Red’s office every five minutes, informing him that last night you
stayed at work until half past eleven—he might not even be
impressed. He might just ask you whether such a trifling  little task
like that warranted the time you spent on it. But you should report

[PAGE 137]
back regularly about what you have done and present—briefly—the
result of your ef forts.
Be willing to take initiative. Offer suggestions that the Red didn’t
ask for. As usual, get ready for a fight, but he will like that you are
driven.
Please note the wording in the preceding sentence. It doesn’t say
that he’ll like you because you are driven. It says “like that you are
driven.” A Red boss may very well like you—that’ s sometimes the
case—but don’t expect lots of glowing and pleasant praise.
How to Behave When You Meet a Red
You don’t have  to completely adapt to how Reds want you to behave
—that would be surrenderin g. There are several other things you
need to keep an eye on in order to achieve the results you want.
Because Reds  have their faults and failings but often turn a blind eye
to them , you can help to achieve a better result if you know how.
Here are some points to keep in mind.
“ D e t a i l s  …  B o o o o o r i n g … ”
Essentially , Reds dislike getting into details. It’s boring and takes
time. Thus, Reds tend to be careless about small matters. You can
accuse Reds of many things , but meticulousness isn’t typically one
of them . For them the destination will always be more important than
the journey , so Reds will do just about anything to achieve the
desired results . Reds won’t naturally stop to consider the small
things or analyze their method.
Conclusion:  If you really want to help Reds do better work, try to
demonstrate the benefits of keeping an eye on the details. Explain
that the results will be better and profits larger if they just consider a
couple of small but crucial elements of the project.
Be prepared for the huff and puff and a general unwillingness to
act on your advice. But if you’re good at arguing, your advice will be
followed. As we know , Reds are good at pushing themselves to the
limit, just as long as they make headway .

[PAGE 138]
Q u i c k  b u t  O f t e n  F r i g h t f u l l y  W r o n g
As I have written several times before, everything in a Red’s
world is usually  very urgent. You can figure out for yourself the risks
this entails. Putting the pedal to the metal may seem like a good
idea, but only when everything else, and most of all every one else, is
on the same train. Normally , Reds rush ahead of the group, only to
get annoyed when others can’t keep pace.
A Red needs someone who can get him to pause and realize that
not everyone has grasped the situation as quickly as he has. He’ll
never be able to carry out all the phases of a project on his own—
even if he believes he can and probably will attempt to. He still
needs to have his team with him.
You’ve probably heard the expression “quick and wrong.”
Conclusion:  Give examples of instances  where time was lost by
being too hasty . Point out the risks involved in hurrying too much.
Explain that others can’t keep  up, and point out that it would be great
if everyone knew what the project was about. Don’t give in. Assert
that not even he can manage everything himself. Force a Red to wait
for others.
Afterwards, try to discuss the event and show clearly and
distinctly what was gained and how much the Red has profited by
taking things a bit slower .
“ L e t ’ s  T r y  a  F e w  C o m p l e t e l y  U n t e s t e d  I d e a s  a n d  S e e  H o w  I t  G o e s . ”
Should we really do that? Red individuals aren’t anxious about
risks. Many Reds actively search for risky situations just for the thrill
of it. In fact, what others might perceive as dangerous behavior a
Red wouldn’t even think of as risky. “Hey, life is risky. You won’t get
out of it alive!”
However , Reds do need someone who can weigh the adva ntages
against the disadvantages. Disadvantages are boring, of course, so
a Red individual will often simply ignore them. Since the answer to
what risks you take often lies in the details, your approach should be
similar to the way you handle discussing details with a Red.

[PAGE 139]
Conclusion:  Reds calculate risks by constantly looking at the
facts. Facts are something they understand. Since Reds prefer not to
look backward s—old and tiring—and focus on the present and the
future, a plain and honest exchange of experiences may be called
for.
Give examples of situations that historically were show n to be
dangerous. It can be about  business risks, going downhill skiing
without a helmet, or calling the boss an idiot. Prove things with facts
and demand that the person thinks twice before deciding to take on
a new project without first having checked the conditions.
As usual: Y ou’re right—stick to your guns and don’t give in.
“ I ’ m  N o t  H e r e  t o  B e  Y o u r  P a l .  O r  A n y o n e  E l s e ’ s ,  f o r  T h a t  M a t t e r . ”
Since many Reds are less relationally focused, they’re frequently
criticized for insisting that all relationships must take place on their
terms, even in private life.
People around Reds frequently feel that they’re being steamrolled
by their friends or coworkers. It’s rarely the Red’s real intention; it’s
just something  that happens. You can’t make an omelet without
breaking eggs, and so on.
Reds may not understand that others are avoiding them because
they would rather avoid conflict. This also means that Reds can be
excluded from important information. They may not feel excluded if
they’re invited for a beer on Friday evening, but it’s far worse for
them to feel left out of impo rtant decisions. In the worst case, this
can lead them to suspect the people around them are deliberately
withholding important information. The power strugg le is just
moments away .
Conclusion:  Reds need to understand that the road to full
transparency is to adapt to others. That thought may never even
have crossed their minds; they’re mostly focused on themselves and
their own thing. But by realiz ing that no one can manage everything
alone, they can be prevailed upon to pause and actually care about
other people.

[PAGE 140]
When a Red understands that many people think it’s important to
chat about their child’ s first tooth, how the cabin they rented on
vacation was furnished, and about the boat they’re dreaming of
buying, he can listen actively and contribute to the discussion. Once
a Red understands what all this small talk is about, the door is open.
You may even learn something about him.
“ W h a t  K i n d  o f  W e a k l i n g s  A r e  Y o u ?  J u s t  H a n d l e  I t ! ”
Reds just get angry . It can’t be said any clearer than that. Their
temperament is such that it detonates every now and then, causing
migraines for everyone around. They don’t notice it happening
themselves; screaming a little bit is just another way to
communicate.
No one likes a bully, but not everyone is willing to say so. When a
Red tramples on someone’ s toes, you must tell him nicely that it
doesn’t work like that. He’ll put on an innocent face and pretend that
he doesn’t understand what  you’re talking about. Secretly he’ll be
thinking that if some people are afraid of him, well, that’ s just tough.
Conclusion:  You should confront his behavior immediately . Don’t
allow any exceptions; just say loudly and clearly that you won’t
tolerate coars e remarks, nastiness, and uncalled-for tantrums.
Demand adult  behavior , and if he loses his temper just leave the
room. It’s impo rtant that you never let him get his way just by barking
his head of f.
Just remember that this is a technique—bickering and brawling—
that has worked for the Red for many years. As a child, he might
have gotten his way by quarreling. More than likely , his family
experienced his explosive temperament in his very early years. And
you can bet that they just succumbed to avoid the air-raid siren. Very
few people have confronte d him about this, meaning that the
demand for calmer conversa tions could easily lead to even louder
protests. The one thing a Red detests more than anything else is
being told that he must lower his voice.

[PAGE 141]
Adapting to Yellow Behavior
W h a t  a  Y e l l o w  E x p e c t s  o f  Y o u
“ I S N ’ T  I T  N I C E  B E I N G  H E R E  A L L  T O G E T H E R ? ”
In essence, Yellows are not afraid of conflict. If something goes
wrong, they can really blow a gasket, but if possible, they prefer a
pleasant and cozy atmosphere. Yellows are at their best when
everyone is being friendly and the sun is shining.
A Yellow , howe ver, can be very sensitive to whether people are in
good spirits or not. If the people in a group are in bad spirits and
aggression is pouring down  like from a cloudburst, he won’t be
happy at all.
Conclusion:  A Yellow functions best when he is happy and
content. His creativity is at its zenith and all his positive energy flows.
You should strive to create a warm and friendly atmosphere around
him.
Smile a lot, have fun, and laugh. Listen to his crazy jokes , laugh
along at all his childish remarks, and kindle the easygoing and
happy-go-lucky atmosphere.
If you do that, he’ll feel better about you and listen to you more,
which is always a good thing . A Yellow in a bad mood is not much
fun to be with.
“ I  A S K E D  S O M E O N E  T O  F I X  T H A T  T I N Y  D E T A I L — I  C A N ’ T  R E M E M B E R  W H O ,
T H O U G H . ”
Keeping a Yellow’ s interest is, in all honesty , not the easiest thing
to do. There are many things that bore the socks off a Yellow
employee, customer , friend, or neighbor . A foolproof method to put a
Yellow to sleep quickly and ef ficiently is to bring up lots of details.
Don’t do that. A Yellow simply can’t cope with details. It just gets
boring. Not only will he forget what you’re talking about, but he’ll also
simply think that he doesn’t need any of those details. His strength
lies in the broad brushstroke s. You can easily ask a Yellow to draw
up a vision for the next ten years, but don’t ask him to explain how to
make it happen.

[PAGE 142]
Conclusion:  If you want to keep a Yellow’ s attention, strip away as
much of the minutia as you possibly can. Always start with the big
questions. It’s perfectly fine that you know how to instal l the latest
surround soun d system, but don’t tire your Yellow friend with it. It’s
not for him. He just wants to know how to get the music started.
It’s just like with Reds, if not worse. Yellows don’t care about how
things work, only that they work. So put away the instruction manual
—they’ll never open it.
F O L L O W  Y O U R  G U T .  I T  W O R K S  E V E R Y  T I M E .
If I had a dollar for every time a Yellow has explained a totally
crazy decision by saying that it felt right, I could be sleeping at the
Ritz. There’s a study that shows that some people make better
decisions if they only go on gut feeling. Whatever you do, never
mention that to your Y ellow friend or you’ll never hear the end of it.
It must feel right. A Yellow can readily ignore the actual facts so
long as it feels  right. Don’t misunderstand this: A Yellow understands
perfectly well that some people look at facts and that this is
important. He’s not stupid. It’s just that he’s not interested. He wants
to feel his way .
Do you want to get a Yellow  to make a decision? Try to put the
Excel spreadsheets aside, lean forward, and say with a broad smile,
“How does this feel?”
He will understand exactly . And you’ll get an answer .
Conclusion:  Just accept that a Y ellow feels his way . He has a high
tolerance for uncertainty and isn’t overly afraid of risks. Adapt to it.
You can get through to him by showing him that you too follow your
gut. No matter how wrong this might feel to you, this is the way to a
Yellow’ s heart.  He’ll recognize himself in you. You’ll become the best
of friends. The sun will shine on you.
“ T H I S  C A R  I S  A  P R O T O T Y P E ?  T H E  C O N C E P T  C O M P L E T E L Y  U N T E S T E D ?
N O  O N E  H A S  E V E R  D O N E  T H I S  B E F O R E ?  P E R F E C T ! ”
While a Red focuses on speed, a Yellow focuses on the latest
and greatest. “New” is syno nymous with “good.” All Yellows know

[PAGE 143]
that. And why not? Without creativity and new inventions all
development would simply grind to a halt, right?
Everyone likes having a little excitement in their everyday life.
The difference  lies in how we define “exciting.” For a Yellow , “new”
means “exciting.” Yellows are so-called early adopters, the very first
to try out new things. Check out who is wearing the latest fashion,
who is the first to drive a new and preferably unusual model of car.
Who has the latest cell phone and who knows what restaurant will be
the newest sensation in a few months?
How can they keep track of all this? Don’t ask me. They probably
devote some of their time at work to keep au courant on all things
new and interesting. But they’re also early in implementing new work
methods and new concepts to sell goods and services. It’s just great
fun.
Conclusion:  Allow a Yellow to devote himself to the latest thing.
He’ll love it. If you want to sell something to a Yellow , use
expressions like “state-of-th e-art,” “newly developed,” and “never
before used.” Y our potential customer will really get into gear .
“No one else has ever tried this? I have to have it!”
He’ll like you because you’re so exciting and so interesting and,
above all, innovative. Equip yourself with lots of energy , because it
can be challenging to keep up-to-date, but Yellows will adore you.
However , be prepared to be replaced rather quickly if they find
someone else who is even more knowledgeable about newer things.
“ Y O U  S E E M  I N T E R E S T I N G .  W A N N A  K N O W  W H O  I  A M ? ”
By now we’ve established that Yellows like other people. They
function best if they surround themselves with a crowd. Of course,
Yellows don’t like everyone they meet, but they will give the majority
a decent chance.
You need to show a Yellow that you are just as open and friendly
as he is. If you’re way too closed and private, he’ll feel unwelcome.
Why didn’t you reply when he spoke to you? Why didn’t you smile at
the funny story about his dog? Why doesn’t he know anything about
you? What are your dreams? Insuf ficient personal connection can

[PAGE 144]
result in a strong sense of insecurity , and your relationship won’t
develop in a positive direction. If you’re Red or Blue, you need to
think carefully about how to get this to work. If you want to, of
course.
Conclusion:  Become approachable. Demonstrate that you’re
available; smile  a lot; be sure to have open body language. When a
Yellow wonders where you grew up, don’t just respond with “New
York.” Say that you lived in Chelsea, and that you loved jogging
along the High Line, and that a pickpocket stole your wallet once
while you were walking down Fifth Avenue, and that you met the
love of your life when she accidentally dropped a plate of fries on
your pants at a restaurant. It may seem a bit unnecessary , but you
should definitely show interes t in the Yellow as a person. Admittedly ,
it won’t  be difficult to find out things about him, because he’ll freely
tell you a great deal. But be sure to show that you are curious and
interested.
And remember that Y ellows are very susceptible to flattery .
How to Behave When You Meet a Yellow
To keep a Yellow in good spirits, you need to rub him the right way.
The problem will become obvious after a while. They won’t get that
much work done. I’ve looked at a group of Yellows who were trying
to solve a problem. They all spoke at the same time and had a great
time, and when you asked them how things were going  they said,
“Fantastic!” But nothing got written down. To really make headway
with Yellows, you need to do more than just create a great
atmosphere. Once you’ve tuned into their frequency , you need to do
the following.
L e a r n  t o  T e l l  W h e t h e r  a  Y e l l o w  I s  A c t u a l l y  L i s t e n i n g
I’m just going to say it like it is—Y ellows are, beyond the shadow
of a doubt, the worst listeners. Usually , they will never admit it. The
very expression itself—“awful listeners”—is something negative, and
they’ll do anything to avoid negativity . Many Yellows really see

[PAGE 145]
themselves as good listeners . Who knows where they got that idea?
It’s simp ly not true. Of course, there are Yellows who listen—when it
suits them. Or when they’ve already gotten what they wanted out of
a conversation. But in most cases, forget about it.
They don’t want to listen. They want to talk. Yellows simp ly think
that they can express everything far better than anyone else. The
problem is that they neglect to listen to what anyone else is saying.
Conclusion:  When you’re dealing with Yellows, there are certain
things you need to do. It doesn’t matter if you’re speaki ng to your
partner about your summer  vacation or to a colleague about an
ongoing project, you need a plan of action. You need to have
prepared yours elf carefully . You have to know what your message is
and exactly what response you need from them. You must persuade
the Yellow, happy person to answer your questions very concretely
and hear him say, “Yes, I will be there at four just as I promised,” or,
“Of course I’ll notify the customer exactly what we have agreed to.”
But—big but—be prepared to follow up if it’s important, because
the Yellow didn’t write down any of it. Unless you managed to
persuade him to write it on his calendar , of course. That would be the
best way. But in all other contexts, you should expect that what
you’ve said has gone in one ear and out the other .
L e a r n  H o w  t o  R e s p o n d  t o  “ N o  P r o b l e m — T h a t  W o n ’ t  T a k e  L o n g  a t  A l l ! ”
Yellows are optimists regard ing time; that’s just the way it is.
Sure, your work can be done quickly , but rarely as quickly as a
Yellow thinks. This has to do with the fact that he simply can’t plan or
structure his life. I’ve persona lly worked with people who legitimately
believed that they could manage eight meetings per day, who
thought that it only took two days to renovate an entire kitchen and
that it is possible to walk across Manhattan in twenty minutes.
These are typical manifestations of a Yellow’ s optimism. The
problem is obvious. It’s impos sible to accomplish everything a Yellow
wants to do, particularly because he doesn’t even know  how long
anything takes. And even if he does ask someone how long it takes,

[PAGE 146]
he doesn’t listen to what the person says, because what he’s saying
is wrong. After all, the Y ellow believes he probably knows best.
The other problem is that he won’t get into gear when he should.
Do you know anyone who has taken a day off to paint the bedroom
and at three o’clock in the afternoon, hasn’t opened the can of paint
yet? “I’ll just do this first, then call so and so, then pop out for a bit,
then…” Sometimes I wonder if the people who schedule the
subways are all Yellow . There ’s nothing nasty in this; it’s just about a
total inability to have a realistic sense of time. And a genuine belief
that this commodity is inexhaustible.
I remem ber a dinner I went to with a few Yellow friends. The pub
had a policy of ninety-minute reservations, which meant that if you
got there twenty-five minute s late there wouldn’t be time for an
appetizer or for dessert because the kitchen couldn’t manage it in
time. My partner and I arrived fifteen minutes early—we both have
some splashes  of Blue in our profiles. We went to the table and sat
down to wait for the others. T ime passed. Forty minutes later , twenty-
five minutes late, they arrived, joyfully joking about how they had
forgotten the time. We mana ged to order just a main course, eat it,
and quickly pay for it before the next guest wanted his table. The
strange thing was that when we spoke about the incident afterwards,
their recollection was that they were just a few minutes late. They
had simply repressed the fact that they missed 30 percent of the
dinner .
Conclusion:  Coordinate all appointments properly with Yellows.
Synchronize your watches. Explain very clearly that the plane takes
off at 8:00 P.M. and that if he doesn’t show up by then he’ll be left
standing at the gate. Say it like it is: If he’s not in his car outside your
door two hours before the plane takes off, you’ll drop down  dead of a
heart attack. Tell the Yellow that you will be deeply irritated with him
and that your friendship could be damaged due to his continual
slipups.
If the dinner is due to start at 7:00 P.M., invite everyone for that
time, but make it 6:30 for your Yellow friends. They’ll arrive last

[PAGE 147]
anyway . They’ll come with very well-worded excuses. Be prepared
for very colorful stories. But also know that Yellows will emphatically
deny that they are optimists regarding time. They’ll insist that they
most certainly kept an eye on the clock. It was just that something
happened on the way .
I t  L o o k s  L i k e  a  H a n d  G r e n a d e  W e n t  O f f  i n  H e r e
The most cluttered desks I have ever seen have all belonged to
Yellows. Computer screens with so many Post-it notes stuck to them
that you can barely see the screen. The most topsy-turvy garages
and the most overloaded attics belong to Yellows as well. But this is
only the visible. Ask to look at a Yellow person’ s calendar . Or
handbag. Don’t even think about looking in a Yellow’ s closet. And
this is still only the purely physical.
Meetings are moved or forgotten; things disappear; whole cars
are lost in parking lots. Keys are gone without a trace. Furthermore,
many Yellows have no ability  to plan their day. They can go to the
supermarket five times in a row and buy three things at a time
because they didn’t write down what they needed. This can be
because they don’t know what they want until they get there or
because they’r e sure they’ll be able to recall the nineteen things they
need to buy. (Yellows have a very generous view of their own ability .
They’ll tell anyone who wants to listen that they have the best
memory in the world.)
Conclusion:  If you really want to help a Yellow get organized,
make sure he gets at least some structure in his life. Help out by
creating a simple list. If you are going shopping: Write down
everything yourself. Y our partner or pal will forget half of the items.
Create a structure for him. Yellows are the ones who are most in
need of structure in the form of diagrams and checklists.
Paradoxically , they hate all of that. They won’t let them selves be
“shoehorned” into a system not of their own choosing. Be diplomatic.
If you press too hard, you can get some powerful reactions:
“Why does everything have to be micromanaged? Are we living in
a fascist state, or what?”

[PAGE 148]
R e m e m b e r  T h a t  f o r  Y e l l o w s  t h e  M o s t  I m p o r t a n t  T h i n g  I s  t o  L o o k  G o o d .  A l l
t h e  T i m e .
“Me, me, me.” Yellows have strong egos, just like Reds, no doubt
about that. They like getting attention; they throw themselv es into the
center of things faster than anyone else. They enjoy themselves the
most when they’re in the middle of where the action is. Your yellow
friend is a ray of sunshine, talking louder and faster than everyone
else and lighting up a room with his behavior .
“Shine all the spotlight on me. See me, hear me, like me.” But this
means that no one else gets any space. Many conversations end up
with the Yellow individual loudly and resonantly speaking about his
experience or his opinion. No matter what you are talking about—
war, starvation, dieting, cars, executives, gardens—a Yellow will
bring up a story in which he himself is the protagonist. If he doesn’t
have any story , he’ll make one up.
Their thoughts often begin with the word “I.” “I want,” “I think,” “I
can,” “I know ,” “I will.” It’s quite natural. They like other people, but
there is one thing they like even more: themselves.
Conclusion:  Yellows need to understand that there are other
people in the room or worki ng on the project besides themselves.
You can never allow Yellows to consume all the oxygen. They need
to hear— from someone with courage and perseverance—that they
have to let others enter the conversation or whatever it may be.
It’s impossible to explain this in the midst of a conversation with
others present. It won’t fall on fertile ground. A Yellow can be very
offended by such criticism. He’ll think things like, “Everyone else just
thinks of themselves,” or, “I’m the only one who looks out for me.”
This type of feedback must be given discreetly and in a positive way.
It depends a little bit on how Yellow the person in question is, so you
will probably need a plan.
Be prepared for one thing: You may very well become enemies in
the process. You’re definitely  taking a risk here. Hearing that you are
egocentric and self-centered  is extremely unflattering. Yellows will

[PAGE 149]
understand this; they’re not stupid. But they will just think that your
analysis is wrong. So you’ll have to work a lot here. Or swap pals.
A l l  T a l k ,  b u t  N o  W a l k
I might as well get straight to the point here to avoid confusion:
Yellows talk more than they work. They have a penchant for talking
about everything they need to do rather than actually doing anything.
Everyone who knows a genuine Yellow knows exactly  what I’m
talking about.
Okay , so many people have trouble getting motivated to work,
especially with boring tasks. But Yellows find it particularly hard to
leave the starting block when faced with uncomfortable tasks. It may
be about having to call a dissatisfied customer , or getting an oil
change, or going to the pharmacy . If it’s dull and uninspiring, it won’t
happen. Their excuses for avoiding these tasks will be numerous
and imaginative.
Because a Yellow’ s perspective on time is based in the future,
they spend more time talking about the future than dedicating their
energy to getting there. Seldom have so many crazy plans been
drawn up or so many insane goals set as is done by Yellows.
Because they think aloud, people around them believe that these
fantasies are going to happen: “W ow! It sounds amazing!”
Conclusion:  To help your Yellow friend you need to make sure
that he puts his shovel in the ground and starts digging. Push him,
but push gently . Treat him a little bit like you would treat a child. Be
kind but clear . If he notices  that you’re becoming his taskmaster ,
things may become difficult. Yellows hate feeling controlled. They
need the most help to get into gear, but that doesn’t mean they like
it. They are free souls and don’t obey anyone else.
So you need to be diplomatic. Softly and gently explain the value
of actually doing the job itself, now that he knows what needs to be
done. Take a moment to explain to a Yellow how the great popularity
he already enjoys can actua lly be increased even further if he just
happens to get finished. Everyone will love him, and he will be more
beloved than ever .

[PAGE 150]
Does that sound simple? It is simple. All you need to do is
overcome your resistance to inflating someone’ s ego in such an
obvious way . But it will work.
R e a l i z e  T h a t  Y e l l o w s  M a y  S e e  Y o u r  L i p s  M o v i n g  b u t  N o t  H e a r  A n y t h i n g
Y o u ’ r e  S a y i n g
This could very well be a subtitle to a section on bad listeners,
because these  things are connected to each other . All of us make
mistakes and no one is perfect. This is obvious to everyone, even to
a Yellow . In hypothetical discussions, Yellows can agree  that other
people really need to get a grip, sort things out, and do better . They
can even admit that there are no perfect people. So far , no problems.
The problems arise when we try to make a particular Yellow
understand that he may need to improve. This creates a conflict,
especially if the criticism is expressed in public.
Yellow people find it difficult to cope with criticism. They don’t like
it beca use it doesn’t make them look good. Imagine, there’ s
someone who doesn’t like everything they do and everything they
say! I have individually sat down with Yellows and given them
personal feedback on their profiles. Everything goes fine until we get
to the page with the headin g “Areas of Improvement,” which is to
say, weaknesses.
Even if we’re on good terms, the temperature in the room gets
significantly cooler. Defensive walls pop up quicker than you can say
“poor self-awareness.” Deep down the Yellow individual knows that
he has weaknesses; he just won’t consider talking about them.
Conclusion:  If you wish to get through to a Yellow with negative
feedback, you need to be persistent. Create a friendly atmosphere in
the room and find the right tone so that your criticism lands where it
should.
You can always slam your fist on the table as hard as you can to
really shake him up, lay down  the cold, hard truth, and give it to him
straight. I don’t recommend this. Better to work slowly and
consistently , repeating the same feedback until he understands.

[PAGE 151]
Clarity is key. Make sure to be extremely well prepared, with all
possible facts to substantiate your claims. Yellows are clever
manipulators. If he senses that you’re not serious in your criticism
and that you won’t follow up, he’ll lure you off track. He is good at
smokescreens. Make sure you don’t get lost in the fog.
Get real answers to your questions, and be sure that he
understands the message. Insist that he writes down what you have
said. Ask him to repeat your feedback.
You also need to set up a plan of action. But save that for the
next meeting. Right now, you’ve probably gotten as far as you can
with a Y ellow . You’ll just exhaust yourself if you keep going.
One more thing: This doesn’t happen with positive feedback.
Then, the Yellow will jump on the bandwagon quicker than you can
imagine.
Adapting to Green Behavior
W h a t  a  G r e e n  E x p e c t s  o f  Y o u
E V E R Y T H I N G  S H O U L D  F E E L  G O O D  A L L  T H E  T I M E
Security will always be important to a Green. A Green worries
about everything that may happen. He doesn’t like insecurity and
solves it by hiding under the covers. If you don’t see it, then it’s not
there. He does n’t want to be anywhere if it’s too insecure.  He strives
for stability and doesn’t even want to think about wild gambles.
You may be thinking, The world is a dangerous place to live.
There’ s an infinite number of dangers out there. Absolutely anything
can go wrong.  My relationship may fall apart; I might get sick; my
husband [or wife] could leave me; my children might think I am an
idiot. I can lose my job; my boss may start agreeing with my children;
I could end up in conflict with a lot of people. On the way to work, I
could have a car accident. A person can die from a tiny fish bone
caught in his throat!
All these things make life scary. Anything can happen. Many
Greens I’ve known over the years in my role as a coach  have said
that all these potential dangers paralyze them. They become

[PAGE 152]
overwhelmed with thoughts about these risks and dangers. They
become completely powerless to act. And since they’re not
particularly motivated to get out in the world, it becomes  easier to
just stay at home. Nice and safe at home by the hearth.
It wasn’ t Greens who left their homes and immigrated to America.
They would never have gotte n on the boat, because who knows how
the trip would go? And if you survived the voyage itself, who could
really say what you would find when you got there? Those stories
about all those people who achieved success and wealth could well
be humbug from start to finish. And if you did get a job and if you did
find somewher e to live, who knows if you would be happy? Imagine
if you end up even more miserable than you were at home! You
know what you have, but you have no idea at all what you’ll get.
Conclusion:  Accep t that this person doesn’t think like you do.
Accept that he is driven just as much by fear as by anything else—
perhaps even more. Show that you’re prepared to listen to what he is
anxious about.  Don’t say things like “There’ s nothing to be afraid of.”
It doesn’t work because the fear itself is real. And it’s also not true.
There are many legitimate things to be afraid of. We all have things
we’re anxious about; a Green just has more of them.
Instead, help your Green friend to face his fear of the unknown.
Encourage him to brave thing s that feel scary and still move ahead.
Just as we learned to swim as children, despite the fact that the
water looked cold and dangerous, you can give support through
small, gentle nudges forward.
When your friend says that the grass only looks  greene r on the
other side, simply take a deep breath and keep at it.
N O T H I N G  H A P P E N E D .  T W I C E .
I’m sure you recall that I mentioned the Green’ s passivity . Nothing
is too big to be ignored. Being proactive and driven, having an active
lifestyle—all these things disturb tranquility . And it won’t be
appreciated. He won’t be happy if you’re constantly coming up with
new things to do.

[PAGE 153]
Greens feel better when they don’t have to be active. They come
home on a Friday evening so completely exhausted from spending
the week trying to accomplish as little as possible that they now need
to take a good rest. I’ve met Greens whose efforts to avoid work cost
them more energy than actually doing the work.
The consequences are obvio us to those around them. They don’t
like weekends with full schedules. Visiting the mother-in-law ,
organizing a picnic, taking his son to soccer , cleaning out the garage,
inviting the neighbors over for dinner—everything becomes a burden
for him, and half the time nothing gets done at all. A Green glides
under the radar and disappears completely . He needs peace and
quiet to be able to do what he does best. Peace and quiet make him
feel safe and content.
Conclusion:  It’s important to respect this on one level. We need to
put ourselves in other people’ s shoes, knowing how stressful it can
be for them to be constantly  on the go. In today’ s society , it’s not
possible to avoid all the bustle and activity . It means that a genuine
Green often feels that he is doing something wrong. He hears about
everyone else’s weekends, their activities, how they’ve completed
one complicated project after the other . For a Green that just sounds
exhausting.
The solution is to allow the Green his periods of peace, quiet, and
inactivity . He needs to function like that. This doesn’t mean, of
course, that he can sit on his butt his whole life, but he does need to
be allowed to do a reasonable amount of—nothing.
“ W H E R E  A R E  W E  G O I N G ?  I  T H I N K  I ’ L L  S I T  T H I S  O N E  O U T . … ”
Stability and predictability are valuable to a Green. And when you
think about it, it’s very logical—it’ s a good thing knowing what’ s going
to happen. We probably all have some measure of control
dependency . We simply want to know . For Greens, this dependency
is very strong. When Reds ask what, Yellows wonder who. When
Blues ask why , Greens want to know how .
A Gree n simpl y needs to know what the plan is. What needs to
happen? When will things be taking place? What should he expect?

[PAGE 154]
Just look at how it works at home. Who always has the same spot
at the breakfast table? I know that many of us are creatures of habit,
but if you snitch a Green’ s since-a-long-time-ago-claimed chair , you
unhinge his very existence and he won’t be able to get his food
down.
But their need for predictabil ity goes further than that. It’s about
anything that even resembles  change. In our society today, the only
thing that’s permanent is change. Nothing is totally predictable;
everything rotates on its own axis and appears in new shapes and
forms. And all of this is extremely stressful for Greens.
Conclusion:  Since a Gree n won’t come up with anything on his
own, it will be you and I who will have to handle the planning. But
maybe that’s okay. We can help ease Greens’ minds by explaining
every step of the plan. Instead of just saying that I’ve invited guests
over for the weekend, I could  explain that we will be having John and
Mary over for dinner and we’ll be offering a three-course dinner
consisting of an appetizer , a main course, and a dessert. I’ll fix the
main course while my Green partner should make the dessert and
should follow this recipe. I explain who is doing what. Who will buy
the wine, who will buy the flowers, and so on. I might even explain
which day my Green partner has to do the shopping. And who
knows, maybe  I’ll write down  the address of the flower shop with a
list of exact instructions about what should be purchased.
Does this sound exaggerated? Not at all. Remember , Greens
aren’t world champions at taking their own initiative. Think of your
family as a company—everyone doesn’t do the same things,
because we’re  good at different things. If you’re better at taking the
initiative, do it. But make sure that your Green partner is on board.
Otherwise, there’ s a risk that he’ll run out the back door .
How to Behave When You Meet a Green
Okay , now you know how your Green friends would like to be
handled. The result will be a calm and excellent relationship, and you
will be good friends for many years. Nice, huh? But you can’t stop

[PAGE 155]
there, because unless you’re  a genuine Green yourself you’ll want to
actually do something every now and then. And you’ll need to have
some appropriate strategies to kick-start your stability-loving friend.
“ W h y  D o e s  E v e r y t h i n g  H a v e  t o  B e  S u c h  a  T o - d o ?  U g h .  I ’ m  G o i n g  t o  B e d . ”
I’ve said this before, but we need to spill more ink on this issue.
Greens don’t like friction of any kind. They back off when a
discussion heats up or if you frown at the wrong time. Everything
could be a potential conflict, and this is a very bad cond ition for all
Greens. They lock themselves in and become silent and passive.
Many years ago, I was giving a sales conference at which I
trained sellers in personal effectiveness. One of them was playing
with his cell phone unremittingly , and when I—nicely and gently—
asked him to write his text messages during the break, he
completely stiffened up and stopped speaking. He didn’t respond to
any questions or take part in any discussions. He didn’t so much as
lift his pen for the remainder of the day. He glared at me, and when I
asked what the problem was he just shrugged his shoulders.
He gave me what is probably the worst evaluation I have ever
received. Although the confe rence was five days long, it was that
one day that was critical to him, and he truly cut me to shreds. He
had never encountered such a rude and incompetent consultant. He
felt as if I had stuck a knife in his back. Obviously , this was a
completely unreasonable reaction, especially considering that we
had agreed not to use our mobile phones during work sessions. But
it didn’t matter—this guy still thought that I had wronged him wholly
and entirely , and he punished me the only way he could: through
total passivity . I phoned him afterwards and confronted him about it.
He admitted that it was juvenile behavior and apologized.
Conclusion:  If you have a comment to make about a Green’ s
behavior , make sure you’re careful about how you present it. For
example, if it involves criticism , you should deliver it in private. Make
sure that the person you are talking to understands that you still like
him, but that you believe that he and the group (work team, sports
team, family , association) will function better if he chang es certain

[PAGE 156]
things. Don’t ask him what he can do about the behavior; just ask
him to do certain specific things. It may be that he knows what to do,
but as usual, he will not lead the conversation—you’ll need to do
that.
“ I t  W a s  B e t t e r  B e f o r e .  M u c h  B e t t e r . ”
When I’m talking about change, one of my favorite exercis es is to
ask everyone in the group who is afraid of change to stand up.
Occasionally someone will stand up, but it’s more common that no
one moves.
Why? Because we all understand that change is inevitable and
necessary if we’re going to keep up with the world. Some people can
admit that they dislike change, but this observation is only at an
intellectual level. And so we all sit quietly in our seats prete nding that
there are no opponents to change to be found here. And besides, no
one else is standing up.
After that, my second question is, “Who thinks that someone else
in the group is afraid of change?” Suddenly the whole group stands
up, and they look around quite amused. So who doesn’t like
change? Answer: “Everyone else. And because those other people
are the problem, I don’t need to do anything at all.”
The issue is widespread. The majority of the population has
Green as its dominant quality . This is the main reason why we can’t
accept change with open arms. Everything new is evil, and it should
be strongly discouraged.
Rapid change is the most difficult to accept. The faster it is, the
worse it is. So the faster the wheels of society spin, the more frantic
all those oppo nents of change become. We see this all the time in
new reports. Yellows and Reds devise constant change, Greens and
Blues, who are in the majority , try to keep up. And the stress just
increases.
Conclusion:  If you want Greens to accept change, you’ll have to
equip yourself with a good dollop of patience. Break down the
process into small pieces and set aside a few weeks to persuade,
win over, and spell out the particulars. You must describe the

[PAGE 157]
process in detail, and since no one is going to take any notes, you’ll
have to go through it again, and again, and again until the message
gets home.
The group must get the chan ce to feel its way to the only possible
solution—change. Once that feeling has developed, you’re home
free. But the road is long and complicated. You need to know exactly
where you’re heading, and you need to remind yourself constantly
why you are going through all this trouble. If you are Red, every day
you’ll be seized by the urge to simply force your opinion on the
group, but I hardly need to explain that you might as well shut the
company down if you do that. It would spare everyone involved a
great deal of time and suf fering.
S o m e o n e  N e e d s  t o  T a k e  t h e  H e l m  I f  W e  A r e n ’ t  G o i n g  t o  S i n k  t o  t h e  B o t t o m
Let’s be honest—isolated from everything else Green behavior is
not a distinct leadership quality . Especially because oftentimes
leadership is all about chang e. Fortunately , this doesn’t mean that
there are no good Green bosses—there are many of them out there
—but they don’t grow on trees. They won’t step forward in the same
way as Reds and Y ellows do.
It’s convenient not to have to take responsibility . I think all of us
have a certain degree of laziness in us. It’s liberating not to have to
think, to avoid having to decide and just be a passenger . Of course,
it varies depending on the circumstances, but Greens have
developed this laziness into an art form. They don’t want any
responsibility because a) it can lead to conflict if someone doesn’t
agree with a decision or b) there may be lots of extra work and that’s
never good. And so they dodge it, for as long as possible.
Responsibility is burdensome, requiring inner strength as well as
an external drive to assume it. But at the same time, it’s a measure
of maturity , and it begins with taking responsibility for yourself and
your own life. Greens (and some other colors on occasion) have a
tendency to blame everything  and everyone but themselves. I knew
a woman who had an entire list of things she could blame if
something didn’t go her way. She blamed the government, the

[PAGE 158]
opposition, taxation, her employer , the state of the market, her
education, her parents, her husband, and her children. Sometimes it
was the weather ’s fault. She blamed everything and everyone
except herself.
What did she gain from this? She didn’t have to take any
responsibility herself. Because there was always some other factor
that was respo nsible for this and that, she never had to tackle her
own problems and really change anything. I remember that I asked
her to explain how it was possible that she was also not on her own
list, but I suspect that she didn’t understand the question.
Given the monumental passivity a Green perso n can
demonstrate, we immediately end up with problems. If someone
doesn’t row the boat or take the helm, no amount of prayer will ever
help. And Greens will rema in seated, waiting for help. (Usually ,
someone comes and helps out; so, despite everything, they survive.)
Conclusion:  If you want to make headw ay with a large group of
Greens, you have to take command, get a firm hold on the steering
wheel, and, in some cases, simply get into the driver ’s seat yourself.
Asking a group of Greens to solve a task is as much use as trying to
put a brake on a canoe. They won’t get started unless you put them
on the track.
A dogg one-I-thought-they-we re-adults approach will not work.
Sure, they’re adults, but they’ re children when it comes to such basic
things like making decisions. This is because once upon a time they
made a decisio n not to make  any decisions. So someone has to put
his foot down and just decide.
Do it and do it now . But at the same time, do it gently .…
Adapting to Blue Behavior
W h a t  a  B l u e  E x p e c t s  o f  Y o u
I T ’ S  B E S T  T O  T H I N K  E V E R Y T H I N G  A L L  T H E  W A Y  T H R O U G H  F R O M  T H E
B E G I N N I N G
A Blue prepares meticulous ly. If you’ve planned to meet at a
certain place at a certain time, you can rest assured that he’ll be

[PAGE 159]
there. A Blue will have gone through all the material, analyzed
everything down to the smallest detail, and he’ll be prepared to
discuss just about anything on the topic. He will have an alternative
plan and a contingency plan for that as well.
H E ’ S  T H O U G H T  O F  E V E R Y T H I N G ,  S O  Y O U  S H O U L D ,  T O O
Being Blue is a little like doing military service: No excuses will be
allowed. If you get a flat tire, you should be prepared for it. If there’ s
a punct ure in the spare tire, you must have a plan for that, too. A
Blue will have some critical questions if you say something like
“That’ s just the way it is.” The next time you meet him, his
confidence in you will be tarnished.
Conclusion:  Make sure you can show that you’ve done your
homework and are well prepared. For example, when a Blue
customer or policy maker has a question you should be able to pull
out that exact folder from your briefcase. Don’t make a big deal out
of knowing the answer . He expected nothing less.
And—most important—if you don’t have the answer , just say so.
Acknowledge that you don’t know . Don’t offer any excuse just to get
out of the situation. When the Blue discovers the white lie—and he
will—you will fall out of favor . It’s not ideal to have to come back with
the answer the next day , but it’ s definitely preferable to telling a fib.
A car salesman I know usually says that when he meets Blue
customers he knows from the outset that the customer is more
informed about a particu lar model of car than he, since as a seller he
might have fifty models to keep track of. Blue customers don’t ask
questions to find things out; they ask to confirm what they already
know . So the car salesman doesn’t even try to pretend anymore. If
he does n’t know the answer , he acknowledges it and then finds out.
It’s the only way to win a Blue customer ’s confidence.
W E ’ R E  N O T  H E R E  T O  H A N G  O U T  A N D  B E  C O Z Y
This is a given if we’re referri ng to a working relationship. Stick to
the job. Make sure to stay focused on the task at hand. A Blue is not
at all interested in your personal preferences or what you think about

[PAGE 160]
his choice of car, house, sport, or anything else that is not related to
work. He’ s there to work. Period.
I remem ber once that after about five or six meetings  with a
personnel manager in a big company I thought I had gotten to know
him. We had passed the stage of shaking hands every time, and by
now he knew how I preferred my coffee. At the seventh visit it
occurred to me to ask him what he planned to do over the holidays. I
don’t know what came over me. At first his look became vacant and
then his anxiou s eyes began to wander all over the room. I ended up
saying some nonsense to cover up my mistake. I hadn’t told him
what I had done on my holidays, either . About four visits later, he
informed me gently that he planned to go to Thailand over the new
year with his family .
That was the opening.
Conclusion:  Stick to the task. Work with checklists where factual
matters are noted—things you can tick off together with the Blue. If
you’re Yellow , put a part of your spontaneity aside. For that matter ,
put away as much spontaneity as you can. Force yourself to do one
thing at a time. Remind yourself that a Blue will rarely or never ask
how things are going or show interest in your personal problems.
Don’t ask how things are going for him on a personal level, either .
The word itself would be his answer: “Personal. This is private. Stay
off.” In time he will open up if he wants to. It’s not that he doesn’t like
you; he just wants to work first. Accept this and it will go well.
N O  V I S I O N  N E C E S S A R Y .  L E T ’ S  A L L  S T A Y  I N  T H E  R E A L  W O R L D ,  T H A N K
Y O U  V E R Y  M U C H .
Your Blue friends aren’t flying around up there in the blue, blue
sky. They’re on the ground using their critical minds to judge whether
things are realistic or not. While you may think they’re boring,
suspicious, or downright pessimistic, they believe that they’re only
realists. They want to know what reality looks like, not what the world
looks like if you’re a dreamer or a visionary .
I remember once when I was working in the banking world we
were having a kickof f event and I wanted to inspire my team to do

[PAGE 161]
great things, the likes of which had never before been seen. I
finished my rousing speech by exclaiming, “Soon we will stand on
top of the peak of success and look down on the market we’ve
conquered. We, all of us, will be atop that mountain!” While both
Yellow and Red and, to a certain extent, Green employe es smiled
and were hype d up, the Blues  only said one thing: “We can’t imagine
ourselves up there. How did we get up there?”
The Y ellows shouted, “Don’t you have any vision?”
And the Blues replied, “W e have Excel.”
If a plan seems  crazy , a Blue will never have any confidence in it.
There’ s no point in playing on his feelings or trying to prom ote ideas
that are way too wild. What you say needs to have realistic
perspectives; otherwise, you won’t get anywhere.
Conclusion:  Think through  what you want to say and what you
want to convince a Blue to believe. Put daydreams and visions
aside. It may even be worth rethinking the kind of language you will
use to talk about your plan. Skip all those inspirational speeches that
Yellows and Reds adore. Stick to the facts, and be clear .
If you have an idea that hasn’t been tested before, try to set
reasonable goals. Don’t say that you will dominate the market within
three months or that the Little League team will win the
championship despite having lost all of their matches so far. They’ll
only consider you a lunatic. If you have Yellow in your own profile,
you should really think twice about how you interact with Blues.
You’re already fighting an uphill battle as far as a Blue is concerned.
And be careful to avoid any overly dramatic body language.
D E T A I L S :  F A C T S  A R E  T H E  O N L Y  T H I N G S  T H A T  M A T T E R
Details are essential to communicating with a Blue. If you really
want to get through to them,  you must make sure to be very exact.
Carelessness or ignoring the details won’t be appreciated.
More than one seller has been turned out of a sales visit due to
negligence—for failing to know the nitty-gritty details. And remember
that it’s not a question of whether the details are crucial for a

[PAGE 162]
particular decision or not. They may have no real bearing on the
issue at all. But a Blue decision maker simply wants to know .
He also wants to know exactly . If you’re asked how much a
particular product costs, don’t say, “About ten dollars.” Say, “Nine
dollars and seventy-three cents.” It’s a precise answer . A Blue is
more intereste d in an exact price than a low price. He may very well
negotiate, but he wants to know the precise cost.
Conclusion:  Prepa re yourself well. When you think you’re
prepared and that you know all there is to know about an issue, go
through it all one more time. Make sure you have answers to
absolutely everything. Accept that this person might want to have
more data to feel secure. Give him the details he needs in order to
move on. He’ll always wonder if there’ s any more information. But
this way , you can keep him calm and, you hope, content.
T H E R E ’ S  N O  S U B S T I T U T E  F O R  Q U A L I T Y
Quality is what drives a Blue. Everything else is secondary .
Everything else he focuses on stems from a deeply rooted desire
that everything  must be perfect. A Blue is discontented if he’s not
allowed to perform his work to an exacting standard. It has nothing to
do with what quality of work is actually needed. It’s simply  due to his
belief that things must always be done the proper way .
This, of course, takes a huge amount of time. But the advantage
is obvious—if you do it right from the beginning, you will avoid having
to redo it. This is actually a great way of saving time. But since a
Blue does not think in terms of hours, days, or even weeks—but
rather in months and years—he doesn’t see the potential downside
of his exacting  standards. If a thing is worth doing, it’s worth doing
right—and that takes time. It’ s as simple as that.
Conclusion:  Be particularly  meticulous in your work when trying to
impress a Blue; otherwise, he will view you as sloppy and careless.
You should be on your guard about expressing yourself using
negative terms concerning how the Blue spends too much time just
on quality . Use words like “careful control,” “properly inspected,” “the
importance of quality .” Avoid criticizing Blues for taking too much

[PAGE 163]
time or fussing  over details that may be unnecessary . Instead, praise
them for their attention to detail and the superior work they do. Let
the Blue understand that you are doing quality work and that you
understand its value.
This means that you should prepare very carefully before any
meetings with a Blue. He judges you by the merit of the work you
create. Not by how funny you are, not by who you know , not by
whether or not you invite him to fancy lunches. None of this means
anything if you are careless. When you are finished with a task—
double-check it. If possible—triple-check. Have someone else look at
it. Only then should you show it to your Blue colleague.
How to Behave When You Meet a Blue
Just agreeing to a Blue’ s initiative would be like driving a car with the
parking brake on. Your task is most likely to get things moving, but
you can’t just hit the gas. Instead, you need to find the right lever to
pull and take of f the Blue parking brake.
A Blue has feelings like everyone else, and he appreciates
people. It just looks a little different. Because most of a Blue’ s
emotions are self-contained,  he may seem a little cold. No facial
expressions to speak of, no gestures, no emotional expressions at
all. Blues often don’t seem interested in other people and simply
focus on the issue at hand.
If we’re sitting in an accounting firm or if we’re trying to solve an
important problem in the company , then this is a good approach. But
every time other people, especially Yellows or Greens, are involved,
a Blue’ s tendency to dissociate from others can be problematic. He
simply doesn’t realize that other people don’t function in the same
way. People want to feel like they can relate to this person. They
don’t want to feel like robots.
Conclusion:  Remind him that other people have feelings. Give
examples of times when he bruised other people’ s feelings—like
when he pointed out all the flaws in the neighbor ’s new house.
Explain that he doesn’t need to express himself critically all the time.

[PAGE 164]
Show him that people can take great offense when others criticize
their home, car, spouse, or children. Be clear and tell him that being
honest isn’t an excuse for being callous and remind him that it isn’t
as simp le as “saying things as they are.” He didn’t say things as they
are. He only said what he thought or believed about a certain thing.
Point out that constant criticism rarely accomplishes anything.
This won’t be an easy task, because he will think that you are wrong.
He has every right to criticize and point out errors and flaws. If he
sees an error, he can’t just ignore it. You might just have  to tell him
that he’ s being impossible.
T h e  D e v i l ’ s  i n  t h e  D e t a i l s
Have you ever listened to a Blue tell an interesting story? Let’s
say he got a flat on the highw ay. He’ll begin by saying that his alarm
clock, a Sony , rang a minute earlier because it was Thursday and on
Thursdays he gargles a little longer with Listerine—the green kind,
since a taste test done by Consumers Union, the largest
independent consumer-testing organization in the world, in their
bulletin issued last March clearly demonstrated that it’s preferable.
Breakfast consisted of two seven-minute eggs and coffee.
Nespresso has a new roast, but he didn’t enjoy it. At least 9 percent
of the beans were damaged, which made him reflect on how bean
structure affects the mouthfe el of the coffee. Then he fetched the
newspaper The New York Times,  since they had made a special
offer, 18 percent discount for three months. At the post office he
spoke to his neighbor—who also reads The New York Times —about
the best way to take care of the lawn in September . “There’ s an
interesting website that discusses different types of autumn fertilizer ,
very fascinating.…”
R o m e  W a s n ’ t  B u i l t  i n  a  D a y !
Haste is only for sloppy peop le. We can tell Blues to hurry up, but
it goes in one ear and out the other . Speed isn’t an end in itself.
Oftentimes, Blues slow down  even more when they’re feeling stress,

[PAGE 165]
since in a high-stakes situation you really don’t have time to make
mistakes. Better to be careful to avoid time-consuming fixes.
This may be true, but someti mes things are urgent, particularly in
our fast-paced society—hurry to work, hurry at work, hurry home
from the same job. Hurry in school, in traffic, in the supe rmarket—
everywhere, everything is urgent. I don’t encourage any form of
behavior that may lead to stress-related illnesses. But sometimes
you have to speed up in order to stay in the race. Outwardly , the
Blue is quite unmoved. He works at his own pace withou t worrying
that those around him may burn out from their more hectic pace.
They actually have themselves to blame.
Conclusion : Calmly and methodically tell the Blue that next week
he’ll need to work at a faste r pace. Explain exactly why this is so
important. Establish that you have only forty-eight hours left to
complete the project. This time is precious and must be used
correctly . Point  to the big picture. Give him valid reasons he should
go against his instincts.
You can readily prove your point by highlighting the long-term
plan: “We must stay on track or we’ll miss our next deadline.” If, for
example, you’re talking about renovating your house, it might be
helpful to negotiate in advance when everything will be ready. If the
in-laws are arriving in four weeks, then the house must be done by
then no matter what. Calculate how many hours can be devoted to
the renovations. Decide which activities should be given priority .
Make sure the Blue sticks to his schedule and keeps moving forward
once he’s completed each task. Otherwise, the risk is that he will
spend five hours polishing the finer details—time that he doesn’t
have.
If you have all the time in the world, well, that’ s another matter .
“ I f  I t ’ s  i n  t h e  B o o k ,  I t  M u s t  B e  T r u e ”
“Can’t we go by our gut feelings?” T ry saying that to a strictly Blue
individual and see what happens. Gut feeling is the opposite of
rational thought, and nothing could be more foreign to the Blue.

[PAGE 166]
Wait a minute:  Does this mean that you should never use your
own intuition if you’re working with Blues? Even Blue individuals
have what we call a sixth sense or “nose” for what can be right. The
difference is that they don’t trust it because it can, of course, be
wrong. The problem is that it’s impossible to prove anythin g with the
help of gut feeling. The only thing that counts is the facts. And even
the facts might not be enoug h—there may be more information out
there that would change everything!
Conclusion:  Tell your Blue friend that if he has to make a decision
without all the facts, he can follow his gut. This can apply to work or
ordering at a new restaurant . Speak clearly and loudly to the Blue,
and explain that if he doesn ’t make a decision he’ll end up going
hungry . Prove that it’s better to do something rather than remaining
paralyzed, waiting for more information.
Point out that that it’s logical to use intuition in this situation
because you don’t have all of the facts. Explain that the results will
still be good— maybe just 95.3 percent of what they could  be but still
good. Help him to calculate risk but also to move on.
D e c i s i o n s  M a d e  H e r e
Because the Blue experiences the decision itself as less
important than the path to the decision, stagnation can occur . After
painstakingly collecting facts and meticulously studying all available
conditions, you finally come to the moment of truth—the decision.
There is a risk that everything can deadlock. On the one hand … but
on the other hand …
A project manager I met a few years ago wanted to buy a new
car. For eight months he test-drove sixteen different makes. Over
fifty different models in different combinations: different engines,
bodies, transm issions, interio rs, colors. He tried everything. Fabric
versus leather  upholstery . Gas versus diesel. Automa tic versus
manual. He did calculations on fuel consumption and depreciation
and gave different graphs to respective car salesm en for an
evaluation. After considerable internal torment, he bought a Volvo
V70, then the country’ s most  popular car, in metallic silver, the most

[PAGE 167]
popular color at that time. This particular model was the most tested
car of all by the various consumer agencies that year. You would
think he could have picked that car just by reading about it.
“Why did you go and buy the most common, boring car after all
that research?” everyone asked. “Why not?” he replied.
You can help with a Blue’ s decision stagnation. Provide him with
the crucial piece to the puzz le. Softly and gently , try to steer him in
the right direction or , in any case, in a direction.
Conclusion:  Pay attention to when the decision process stalls out.
Suppose, for example, two equally strong candidates have applied
for an opening at your company . So far, everything has gone well.
The Blue decision maker has submitted detailed information via
email and kept everyone informed about the necessary steps. The
process has been followed to the letter .
In order to get something to happen, provide the decision maker
with the necessary data required for him to make a decision about
one of the candidates. Push him to make a choice. Remind him that
the deadline is approaching. Point out the repercussions of delaying
the decision— the quality of the company’ s work will suffer if he
doesn’t hire a new employee. Explain that everything has been
properly considered and that, regardless of which candidate he
chooses, all the risks have been eliminated.
In Conclusion
Now you have some basic information about how you can interact
with the different colors so that you can get to where you want to go.
The first step is to try to tune into the frequency of other s and then
adapt to them.  In this way, you gain their trust and they are able to
recognize themselves in you.
So the basic rule is to meet a Red with Red behavior , Yellow with
Yellow , Green with Green, and finally Blue with Blue. You may think
that it sounds simple. The difficulty comes, for example, if you are
Yellow and must adapt to a Blue. You might need more training here.
It depen ds on what color you are, how strong your self-awareness is,

[PAGE 168]
and how willing  you are to make headway with a specific  contact in
your everyday life. You can always do what Adam did—you can
continue being yourself.
The next step will be to start leading the person away from
common pitfalls. As you have seen, each color has its obvious
weaknesses. Here a Blue can help a Yellow become more concrete
and the Yellow  can perhaps persuade the Blue to loosen up and be
a little more spontaneous.
At the risk of sounding clichéd—it’ s all about working together ,
about meeting one another in the middle. You already knew that, but
now you know how to do it.

[PAGE 169]
1 3
How to Deliver Really Bad News
The Challenge of Speaking Y our Mind
Who looks forward to bad news? No one. And yet, every now and
then, we still need to break some bad news. In the world around us,
the unexpected can happen, and sometimes the lot falls to you to
inform someone about something negative. Reds are the best at
delivering news that no one wants to hear. Rather insensitively ,
they’ll just come out and say that you’ve been fired, before asking
you if you would like milk in your coffee. Tricky? No, not at all. He
was just finished with the task at hand.
But there’s a difference, of course, between bad news and bad
news. It’s one thing to convey a personal criticism and another to tell
you that your grandmother has just died. The latter is always difficult,
and no one will receive that news well. However , the former can be
fine-tuned and adjusted in a way that makes it easier for someone to
receive.
Feedback alone is a gigantic topic. It gives many people a
stomachache just thinking about it, and many people I meet during
my leadership programs find this area particularly difficult. Not only is
it difficult to give feedback, but it also seems to be difficult to receive
it. This is really strange, because the latter means just sitting there
and listening. But anyone who has received some hard criticism and
left the room afterwards knows that sometimes you can’t utter a
word. When delivered badly , it will leave you feeling sick.

[PAGE 170]
The solution for many executives I meet seems be simply
skipping giving  any kind of feedback. We don’t know how to give
either positive or negative feedback, so we ignore it. I hardly need to
point out why this isn’t a good solution.
The Downside of Just Doing Your Job
Once, many years ago, I had a colleague, Micke, who was
exceptionally good at his job. Of all of us, he was the one who
always met his budget targets. He had won every sales contest and
was held in high esteem by customers. Boxes of chocolates and
bottles of wine would arrive for him from far and wide on a regular
basis.
What do you do with a collea gue like that? You make sure that he
stays. Easier said than done. As his boss, I wanted to show my
appreciation for all his hard work. So, I called his wife and prepared
everything. One Friday , just after lunch, I summoned the team to the
conference room. In front of everyone, I pulled Micke up and
explained that he was greatly appreciated and that we, as a group,
wanted to show how happy we were to have him on our team. I said
he should take the rest of the afternoon off, take his wife out to
dinner , and go to the cinema, and that I would foot the bill. I gave him
fifty dollars—yo u understand that this was some years ago—and two
movie tickets. The babysitte r was already arranged, so off Micke
went. We chee red and applauded a little more, and the whole thing
became a big feel-good moment.
Micke didn’t say a word. Until afterwards.
He took me aside and gave me one of the worst telling-of fs I have
ever received. How could I do that to him? Parade him out in front of
all twenty-seven people, who just stood and stared at him! Awful! He
was just doing  his job. He made me promise never to do anything
like that again. He was mad with me for a week.
Micke was Green. Does this give you any clues?

[PAGE 171]
Feedback Immunity
There are many ways to give feedback, whether positive or negative,
in the wrong way. Now I am going to share some ways you can
properly give feedback. The funny thing is that this approach works
just as well whether the feedback is positive or negative. Some
people are immune to the first kind, others to the latter . I’ve chosen
to focus on negative feedbac k, as this is typically the most difficult. If
you can mana ge to deliver that, then you can probably manage the
positive.
The following advice works just as well for your private life as it
does for work. The only thing you need to know is what color your
target is. So it begins as usual by you analyzing what colors are in
the room . Once you’ve done that, you just have to set to work. The
aim is to get the person to listen to your comments and, ultimately , to
create change . All of the challenges of the previous chapter, about
how others may perceive the different colors, can be dealt  with if you
just know how. The next sections explain just that. Many of the basic
techniques in each section are similar no matter what color you’re
talking to, but in each case the way you approach the person will
vary depending on who he is and how he’ll receive feedback.
How to Give Feedback to a Red—If You Dare
Good news: You don’t need any great skill to give negative  feedback
to a Red. The only thing you need is a Kevlar vest and fire-resistant
hair. Because no matter how you do it, the temperature in the room
will rise. If you’re prepared for it, there won’t be any major problems.
But if a Red doesn’t respond to what you say, then you have reason
to worry. Either he’s ignoring you and what you’re saying or he’s
seriously ill. But the following scenario is the most commo n. So hold
on to your hat.
D o n ’ t  G i f t  W r a p  T h i n g s
Let me be very clear here—when you’re conveying criticism to a
Red, the simplest way to do so is to avoid any form of decorative

[PAGE 172]
wrapping. It’s enough of a challenge to even get through to Reds
with your criticism, because a Red always believes that he is right
and you are wrong.
Many years ago, I discussed Red behavior with a group of
sellers, most of who were Yellow . They understood quite quickly
what Red behavior was, and the Reddest person who came to mind
at that time was their boss, the sales director . They described him as
boorish, a bad listener , completely insensitive, manipulative,
unrelenting, often in a foul mood, too much in a hurry , plus a whole
bunch of other less flattering descriptors. The group was seriously
concerned because they suspected that he hated his staff. Sure, he
also worked very hard, and they respected him for that. But since he
sometimes asked for ideas and then proceeded to lambast anything
that didn’t suit his own agen da, they never got anywhere. Besides
that, he controlled everything  they did, in detail, which was probably
the reason he worked so hard. The whole situation sounded
disturbing, and the sales team would soon fall apart if nothing was
done.
I called the sales director in and explained what the group had
said. He listened with increa sing interest but without showing any
great concern. But his reaction was interesting. Once I had explained
to him that his twenty sales reps—the most important resource he
had to reach his personal goals—thought that he was an insensitive
and aggressive son of a bitch, he replied, “This is just a handful of
anecdotes. It’s not about me. It’s their incompetence that’s the
problem. If they just worked harder and did a better job, I wouldn’t
have to push them so hard.”
When I explained that his impatience was stressing the group and
made the sales reps insecure in their work, he replied that it wasn’t
his fault. Impatience wasn’t  a weakness—it was a strength, for
Pete’ s sake! If he were to drag his feet the same way everyone else
was doing in this company , nothing would get done. If they just
bothered to increase their pace a little bit, then he could calm down

[PAGE 173]
and not be so aggressive. But the problem wasn’t really him—it was
them.
G i v e  V e r y  C o n c r e t e  E x a m p l e s
As is often the case with Reds, everyone else was the real cause
of the problem. Although Reds are efficient at getting things done,
they can also be quick to appoint scapegoats. Remember the
competitive element that constantly lies in wait beneath the surface.
My way of getting through to this man was to break the whole thing
down into tiny pieces and point to specific examples.
For instance, I explained that when he, at nine o’clock on a Friday
night, called up a seller to grill him about a particular customer , he
ruined the poor man’ s weekend. There was no point in saying that
the sales rep was a nervous wreck or that he could n’t sleep,
because this boss would just have ignored it. He wasn’t responsible
for how people felt. However , I was able to point out that the sales
rep would come back to work on Monday morning completely
exhausted by the mental effort. And then he wouldn’t be able to do
his job to the best of his ability. Nothing would be sold that day. By
coaching the sales director to give clear answers, I got him to see
that he would have problems if his sales team wasn ’t able to
perform. Suddenly he had a reason to rethink.
S t i c k  t o  t h e  F a c t s
Another trick to keep in mind : A Red is not that interested in the
feelings of others or what people think. He prefers to focus on facts
and likes to fix things. He sees himself as an excellent problem
solver . I delivered my criticism  by placing the boss in the position of
the key, the only key to the team’ s success. Basically , it appealed to
his ego. He saw himself as the great leader whose ability to lead the
group was the critical factor in creating total dominance in the
industry .
B e  P r e p a r e d  f o r  W a r
So, step by step, example after example, situation to situation, I
went through the sales team’ s perceptions of him. The sales director

[PAGE 174]
protested each time and, without exception, argued strongly against
any hint of personal criticism. The only thing he did was his job. For
every example I gave, I had to repeat the same thing —it didn’t
matter what he thought; as long as this was what the sales reps
thought, he had a problem. He swore and fussed and accused me of
incompetence. He would never hire me again. No one would ever
hire me again after the uncalled-for attack I had subjecte d him to. I
was finished in the industry .
I refused to play along with his ranting and raving. I leane d back
in my chair and waited for the storm to abate. The wors t thing you
can do in such a situation is play along with the theatrics and start
yelling and pounding your fist on the table. The Red’s natural instinct
to win any given situation will then take over completely . He won’t be
able to think long term and will become focused on winning right
now. He’ll ignore the fact that we’re working together and that we’re
going to meet again tomorrow . He’s out to win in this moment, even
if it costs him a relations hip. He ignores the consequences,
aggression takes over , and the real battle begins.
But if you refus e to play along , you can manage Reds’ anger. So I
remained seated, and when he finally calmed down  I simply
continued to the next point, without saying a single word to indicate
that I had been  influenced by his ranting and raving. Step by step, I
got him to see the impact of his conduct on the group. And little by
little, he began to realize that he had to learn to control himself when
things didn’t go his way at work. He needed to take it easier on other
people, to avoid placing unreasonable demands on others, and on
himself, and to wait for dead lines instead of demanding  delivery a
week early , just because he was bored.
A s k  t h e  P e r s o n  t o  R e p e a t  W h a t  Y o u  S a i d
Seen from the outside, this whole incident probably looks like a
violent quarrel, but I knew that I could make real progress if I didn’t
let up. So I did what I recommend everyone trying to give negative
feedback to a Red should do—asked the Red to repeat what we’d
both just agreed on.

[PAGE 175]
So this sales director had to obediently explain how he would act
in the future, point by point, in certain specific situations . (I had a
mandate from the CEO to do this, and we both knew it.) And yet
even though intellectually he knew that I was right, he couldn’t give
in. He crossed out one of the less important items on the list, clearly
showing that it was a victory for him. Somehow , he still had to win.
Conclusion:  Prepare yourself extremely well and try not to give
negative feedback to a Red if you are not feeling strong that day . You
need to be full of self-confidence, so choose your opportunity
carefully . A Red is always strong, always full of self-confidence, so
for him it doesn ’t matter . He will ride into battle at a moment’ s notice,
if neces sary. And, prepare yourself for the possibility that he might
try to turn the tables. He’ll accuse you of everything under the sun so
that he can feel he has the upper hand.
Don’t fall into his trap.
How to Give Feedback to a Yellow—If You Have the
Patience
Yellows are great at many things. Among their great attributes is their
love of change. Ideally , they’d  change things all the time. You would
think that accepting feedback can be a way to start changing the
things that need to be improv ed. In particular , negative feedback is a
great way to find out how to raise your performance to a higher level.
But this isn’t quite the way it works with Y ellows.
In fact, that isn’t how it work s at all. When it comes to change,
Yellows are certainly in favor  of it, but only if they came up with the
idea themselves. Criticism from the outside isn’t always well
received.
Janne, a good friend of mine , is a phenomenal entertainer . There
isn’t a group he can’t amuse, given enough space. His stories are
usually fantastic, and during dinner out they come, a whole
succession of jokes so that he has everyone rolling in the aisles.

[PAGE 176]
One joke after the other , and the whole thing is extremely
entertaining. Janne is truly funny , no doubt about it.
But—and it is a significant but—he dominates everyone else in
the room. No one else gets a word in edgeways. If you try, he stops
and drowns you out, because he doesn’t see you as a partner in a
conversation but rather as his audience. After a while, the laughter
falls silent and things start to get uneasy . Those of us who know
Janne understand that this is due to his desire to constantly demand
center stage, while, for others, it takes more time to see through him.
At a dinner party once, it went so far that people started talking
about Janne behind his back. I felt bad for him, so I decided to take
the bull by the horns.
M a k e  a n  A g e n d a — F o l l o w  I t !
The first thing I had to do was prepare myself. Just sitting down
with Janne and speaking from the heart about the issue wasn’t going
to work. He would just take over the conversation and lure me off the
track. So I decided to give a few concrete examples. I also wrote
down exactly what effects his behavior might have on people. And I
tried to anticipate all his objections.
On one occasion, Janne was helping me in my garden and
afterwards we were sitting in the yard, sweaty and exhausted, each
of us with a beer in hand. He had just told me about a trip he took to
Spain and how frightened he was when the boat that was taking
them to the tiny island where they were staying almost capsized.
(His wife had already told me that they hadn’t even gone by boat.
They had taken a small local plane.) But when he stopped for breath,
I seized the opportunity .
“Janne,” I said. “We need to talk about a serious problem. You
talk too much. And you make things up. I know that what you just
said isn’t true because I spoke to Lena and she said that you flew to
the island. This has to stop or you’re going to end up on bad terms
with people.”
Janne stared at me as if I had lost my mind. “I don’t talk too
much,” he said, a little bit surprised. “And even if I did, it would be

[PAGE 177]
because I have lots to say. I actually remember a time when I—” I
put up a hand in front of his face and moved it quickly back and forth.
It silenced him. I went straight on to the next step.
G i v e  V e r y  C o n c r e t e  E x a m p l e s
“At the last party we had together , you spoke more than fifty
percent of the time we were  sitting at the dinner table. I timed you.
We were there for two hours and you held court for more than one of
them.”
“You laughed,” he said, now quite grumpy .
“At the beginning. But if you’d been more observant, you would
have noticed that it was only at the beginning. And afterwards I
heard several people commenting on your need to take center stage
in rather a negative way .”
This made Janne really indignant. “What ungrateful people! There
I was, entertaining people, and what do I get for it? Sheer hostility! A
stab in the back!”
“I’m not evalua ting what they said,” I said, “but I noticed that they
thought you were talking too much. Do you understand what I
mean?”
It’s incredibly important to get the Yellow to acknowledge and
accept the message. If you don’t recognize a problem, you don’t
have to solve it. What did Janne do? He nodded morosely . I thought
things were going rather well after all.
Then something very strange happened.
B e  A w a r e  T h a t  H i s  E a r s  M i g h t  N o t  B e  C o n n e c t e d  t o  H i s  B r a i n
“I under stand that you were bored,” he said. “You’re right. I’ve told
some of those old stories way too many times. I need to stop
repeating myself.”
I shook my head in despair . He had totally missed the point.
I said, “There’ s nothing wrong with your stories. You just need to
cut down on the number of them. Take every third one. Skip two out
of three. The problem is that you talk too much, not that you repeat

[PAGE 178]
yourself. You have to let the other seven people around the table
speak.”
But he wasn’t listening; he began telling me a new story just to
check if I had heard it before. I had to repeat the whole thing.
E x p l a i n  T h a t  Y o u  D o n ’ t  D i s l i k e  H i m — O n l y  H i s  B e h a v i o r
Criticizing a Yellow is difficult because they take things personally .
If everything isn’t ice cream  and sprinkles all the time, then there
must be a problem somewhere. They think you’ve sudden ly become
enemies. And Janne reacted  in the same way. He physically moved
several inches  back away from me, a clear signal that he was upset.
So I did what you do with little children: I explained that he was still
my friend—probably my best friend—and I thought he was really
funny . The only thing I wanted was for him to bury the blabber a little
bit. He’d just gone overboard a bit. I told him at least ten times that I
liked him very much.
Unfortunately , he’s a frightfully bad listener , so I had to remind
him of all the fun things we had done together and that I cared
tremendously about him. I flattered him and congratulated him on his
choice of a new car . I simply manipulated him. A little bit at a time, he
began to thaw , and his body language became less defensive.
P r e p a r e  Y o u r s e l f  f o r  a  S t r o n g  D e f e n s e  M e c h a n i s m ,  E s p e c i a l l y  t h e  M a r t y r
C o m p l e x
But even that wasn’t enough. Janne came back with comments
like: “Nobody likes me,” “Everybody else is much more entertaining,”
“I thought you thought that I was funny .” This was in addition to all
the usual defense mechanism s, of course: He was only keeping the
party going. It was everyone else who was quiet and boring. What
was entertaining about an introverted wallflower? And talking too
much—how was that a problem? On the contrary , it was actually a
very nice quality . I pointed out that his performances left no room for
others to speak or participate.
A concrete example: At the latest dinner , Janne’ s wife, Lena, was
asked a question on five different occasions and every time it was

[PAGE 179]
Janne who answered. In the end, it was almost ridiculous. Everyone
noticed this except Janne. Lena stopped talking completely .
“But she took so long in answering! And I knew the answ er!” He
understood nothing. Or he chose to deliberately be slow on the
uptake.
A s k  t h e  P e r s o n  t o  R e p e a t  W h a t  Y o u ’ v e  A g r e e d  T o  a n d  F o l l o w  U p  A s  S o o n  A s
Y o u  C a n
This is easier said than done. Both times we met right after our
conversation, he was on the alert. At one point he remained silent
during the entire party . Sure, it was a childish way to point out his
misery , and it was clearly obvious that he was about to burst with
frustration. Not allowing him to talk was like denying him oxygen.
And what irritated him most of all was that no one around the table
asked why he wasn’t saying anything. Couldn’t they see that he was
putting on this show for their sake?
What happened was that his wife began speaking more, and
people really enjoyed her conversation because she was so
pleasant.
After a while, Janne went back to his usual self. It was the easiest
way. He saw no direct benefit from keeping quiet. And Lena fell silent
again. In Janne’ s case, I valued our friendship more than trying to
change his behavior . I never took up the issue again, but sometimes
I take Janne breaks. I simply need to have a good rest from him. If
he had been a coworker instead of a friend, I would have followed up
several times to ensure he really made a change.
Conclusion:  Despite their flexibility and creativity , Yellows are
actually the most difficult to change. They don’t listen and only
implement changes that they themselves have thought of. What you
need to do is massage their egos as much as you can bear and put
words into their mouths.
It’s worth remembering that their short memories also apply to
hard feelings. Although they feel awful when criticized, they soon
forget. They simply repress everything that is difficult or unpleasant.
So if you can just cope with the groans and the moans and maybe a

[PAGE 180]
few tears in between, you can continue towards your goal. Achieving
that change that will do you both a world of good.
With patience and perseverance, you’ll eventually succeed.
How to Give Feedback to a Green—but Think Twice
Before You Do
This is the section I would rather skip. Why? you may be wondering.
Simple. Criticizing a Green can be cruel. They will feel bad and will
simply withdraw and shut down. In general, they have weaker egos
and can often be very self-critical. You don’t want to increase this
burden even more.
It’s important to note that there is a difference between being self-
critical and changing and being self-critical and not doing anything
about it. Many Greens roam  through life wishing that things were
different. But they rarely have the drive to do anything about it. So
they continue to be dissatisfied. Sometimes I think that’s an end in
itself, not to be satisfied. It’s a way to get some attentio n, to gain
some power . I know many Greens who control everything and
everyone in their families by simply refusing to do anything
whatsoever . Psychologists call this being passive-agg ressive—a
very apt expression.
However , if you would like to give feedback to a Green, here are
some methods  that might work. Just make sure that you’re really
committed before you get started.
G i v e  C o n c r e t e  E x a m p l e s ,  a n d  U s e  a  G e n t l e  A p p r o a c h
Of course, it’s always good to be concrete. The difference here is
that a Green actually listens, which both previous colors did not. A
Green hears what you’re saying and dislikes what he hears. But you
have to be concrete, and you might be able to do this in the same
way as with Reds—but in reverse.
While it doesn’t work to tell a Red that you feel bad because of
his behavior or that others feel ill at ease because of something he
did, that’s precisely what works best here. A Green is a relational

[PAGE 181]
person and doesn’t like to offend. It may seem manipulative, but if a
certain form of behavior makes you sad, angry , or just generally
dejected say that. A Green person will sense your mood, and he’ll
pick up what you are saying if you dare to be honest about it.
B e  G e n t l e ,  b u t  D o n ’ t  B a c k p e d a l
It is all about clarity again. If you have any shred of humanity ,
you’ll see how a Green falls apart the more you give him negative
criticism. If you say to your partner that his constant habit of sitting in
front of the television watching sports such as football makes you
feel completely neglected and unloved, you’ll immediately see how
much this news affects him. But then it’s important that you not
backtrack on your statement and say things like “Maybe it’s not that
bad,” or “I still have some projects I’ve been wanting to work on while
you relax.” Dare to be clear , and go straight to the point.
You need to convey your message in the right way. Clearly but
softly . A hand on someone’ s shoulder can be enough to send a
signal that “we’re still friends, but I have a problem when you do this
or that.”
D e a l  w i t h  t h e  G r e e n ’ s  R e s p o n s e  “ Y o u ’ r e  R i g h t — I ’ m  S o  S t u p i d ! ”
Total appease ment. A Green’ s reaction when you tell him how
you feel about his behavior  is a variation on the Yellow’ s martyr
complex. A Green will prostrate himself, accusing himself of being all
kinds of stupid  things. Often there will be comments like “I will never
do that again.” Severe compliancy is sometimes unavoidable, and
tears may flow. Greens crush themselves with additional arguments
about why they’re useless and stupid. They’ll kneel in your presence
for weeks afterwards and try to placate you in all kinds of ways that
have nothing to do with the issue at hand.
I heard a story about a man who was told by his wife that she
really hated that every single evening he simply had to spend a
certain amount  of time playin g video games (a creature of habit). He
admitted that it was childish, unnecessary , and costly . (He spent a
considerable amount of mone y buying upgrades and features for the

[PAGE 182]
games.) He promised to be more attentive to her needs. He
promised everything and more besides to make up for his dismal
behavior . The following six months, he hurried home from work to do
the cooking before she arrived. He bought her flowers once a week,
and he massaged her feet without her even having to ask.
Very sweet and very appreciated—except that he didn’t actually
do what she asked him to, namely , to stop playing compu ter games.
He had avoided accepting that particular detail. After all, he had
never promised to stop straightaway .
B e  S u r e  t o  E x p l a i n  T h a t  t h e  B e h a v i o r  I s  t h e  P r o b l e m ,  N o t  t h e  P e r s o n
As with Yellows, dealing with a Green is like dealing with young
children—“Daddy loves you, sweetie, but can you please stop eating
ice cream on the sofa?” The risk is that the negative feedback will
damage your relationship with the person. But you can easily solve
this by quickly coming back to the person with good news and
positive feedba ck. In this case, it’s not enough just to say that you’re
only concerned about one problematic issue. You need to show in
action that you’re not plann ing to assassinate him. He must be
reassured by what you do, not just by what you say .
A s k  t h e  P e r s o n  t o  R e p e a t  W h a t  Y o u  H a v e  A g r e e d  O n — a n d  F o l l o w  U p !
I’ve noticed that Greens don’t always write down what you say to
them, so it’s a good idea to check with them to make sure you’ve
both interpreted the conversation the same way. If you have a
colleague and would like him to be a bit more punctual, make sure
he unde rstands that the only issue is his timekeeping. He may very
well have gotten the idea that you were actually upset about
something else entirely .
We often assume others will behave the same way we would in
any given situation. And because Greens can be quite vague when
they speak to others and often avoid talking about the real problem,
they frequently get the idea that you’re really talking about something
else. They never go straight to the point themselves, so they assume

[PAGE 183]
you haven’t, either . So what could you possibly be so unhappy
about?
Make sure you’re both in agreement about what the problem is.
And follow up. We’re talking about changing something and creating
a new pattern of behavior . And, as usual, Greens will try to solve the
problem by doing … nothing.
Make sure that doesn’t happen!
Conclusion:  If you’r e human, which I think you are, you may have
a guilty conscie nce and think that you went at the Green guy way too
hard. I remember one occasion when I argued with an employee
because, in my opinion, she didn’t do what she was supposed to.
Her reaction was to comple tely fall apart, and she didn’t come to
work for two days. When we spoke about it afterwards, it turned out
that I hadn’t actually asked her to do those specific tasks. I’d just
assumed that she looked at things the way I did.
I can admit that at the time I was an inexperienced and ineffective
boss. I made a classic mistake—I looked at the situation through my
own glasses and became furious when her glasses showed
something else. And when  I realized this later on, I felt quite
ashamed of myself. She looked so distressed and went out of her
way to avoid meeting me. For a long time I barely dared to say much
more than hello and good-bye to her. She did what Greens are good
at: She ducked down and did even less work than usual.
Many Greens have an uncanny sixth sense that tells them when
it’s time to take things extra easy. But here it derailed. This woman
did virtually nothing at all because she could sense my guilt and
hesitation. She simply took advantage of my bad conscience to get
away with it. I lost her completely . In the end, she was laid off
because she didn’t do her job and I was severely criticized by my
boss because I hadn’t dealt with the issue.
Make sure that you don’t make the same mistake I did. Don’t let
things go too far. Address the problem while there’ s still time. So
stand up and deliver the negative feedback—even to the friendly
Greens in your life.

[PAGE 184]
How to Give Feedback to a Blue—but First, Just a
Word of Warning
Before you try to give negative feedback to a Blue, for Pete’s sake,
make sure you know what you’re talking about. Let me remind you
that a Blue knows exactly what he’ s done and he has a far better eye
for details than you do. So make sure you have your facts ready
before the thought even enters your mind. The section that follows
deals with how to deliver feedback, but the biggest task here
consists in finding out the details of what happened before you give
any feedback.
It may be a good idea to check things out with several other
people who are involved in the issue and to document what they say
and the facts they offer. The Blue will be able to quote everything
and everyone, and he’ll always have proof that what he did was
correct—after all, that’s why he did it. If it had been wrong, he
wouldn’t have done it. Make sure you’re armed to the teeth before
scheduling the meeting.
P r o v i d e  S p e c i f i c ,  D e t a i l e d  E x a m p l e s ,  P r e f e r a b l y  i n  W r i t i n g
It’s not good enough coming in with sweeping phrases like “I think
you’re working  too slowly; can you please speed up?” That’ s way too
general. It doesn’t matter if you’re right or not—the phrase “working
too slowly” says virtually nothing. Says who? Slowly in relation to
what?
What you need to do is point to specific accurate and detailed
examples. You need to say things like “The latest project took
sixteen and a half hours too long.” Then add up the effects this has
had: “We can’t charge the customer for those sixteen and a half
hours, which means that profitability has now fallen by $4,125 (16.5
× $250 per hour , or whatever you charge).
This is a message that a Blue might take into consideration. If you
were to present it this way to a Yellow it would never work, but for a
Blue this is an extremely relevant piece of information. Because it
requires detailed feedback, it would be risky if you were just to

[PAGE 185]
present it in a conversation. You need to have everything written
down. Blues have a certain degree of distrust when it comes to
people talking too much; the written word automatically becomes
more true in their eyes.
So write down what you want to say, but double -check
everything. And why not actually ask someone else to check the
numbers before booking your meeting with the Blue slow coach?
D o  N o t  G e t  T o o  P e r s o n a l  I f  Y o u  D o n ’ t  K n o w  E a c h  O t h e r  T h a t  W e l l
A Yellow and a Green boss could easily pat a Blue on the
shoulder and be personal in the run-up to a meeting where they are
planning to give some tough negative feedback. The reason is
simple—they know that they would react very negatively themselves
if some one were just to jump  straight into criticism without softening
them up first. This is the wors t way to approach a Blue. He’ll just get
suspicious and won’t listen the way you want him to.
Think about how a Red would  have done things. He would simply
have booked a meeting, sat down, and shoved the paper with the
negative result at the person. (If he had such a paper . If it was about
giving feedbac k to a neighbo r about all the leaves that have blown
into his garden , he would simply hand him a garbage bag with all the
leaves and ask him to count them.) A Red won’t dress things up. He
gets straight to the point. Usually , he won’t have any problem telling
you that your work isn’t good enough. Having a project drag on is
inexcusable, and because he hoped that everything would be
finished a day earlier and not a day too late he’ s now deeply upset.
S t i c k  t o  t h e  F a c t s
If you want to get through to a Blue, you need to stick to concrete
facts. Each time you start feeling guilty about saying negative things
and start speaking about how appreciated he is, you’ll confuse him.
He’ll wonder what you’re really trying to say. He has no ego that
must be inflated, and he will see right through your attempts to sugar
coat the criticism you really have. So stick to the facts.

[PAGE 186]
Don’t try the famous sandwich method, used quite extens ively by
many managers and leaders . In order to defuse and soften a grave
message (“you ’ve lost too many customers,” “you’ve cost us money ,”
“you’ve been rude to Ben in Reception”), you should also say
positive things (“you’re a valued employee,” “you usually do the right
thing,” “I like you very much”) before and after the piece of criticism.
The problem with the sandwich method, commonly known as
“praise and blame,” is that no one understands your message. What
did you really want to say? For a Blue, this will be particularly
incomprehensible, because the positive feedback you wrapped your
message up in was relational and perhaps emotional—not
professional. Remember that he’s not there to be your pal, he’s there
to do a job. Be sure to talk about that.
Feel free to ask if he has any suggestions for improveme nt. Use
words like “quality ,” “evaluate ,” “analyze,” “follow up.” Simply use the
language he is used to. Y ou will get through so much more easily .
B e  P r e p a r e d  f o r  C o u n t e r q u e s t i o n s  a t  t h e  M o l e c u l a r  L e v e l
Of course he won’t buy what you say straightaway . Surely it’s
reasonable to give him the chance to ask some questions about
what you’ve said. There’ s a risk that you’ll face a host of
counterquestions that will make you feel like you’re the one being
evaluated.
“How do you know?” “Who said that?” “How have you calculated
this?” “Where does it say that it must be done that way?” “Why can’t
I find this information on our intranet?” “Why did you wait until now to
give me this feedback?” “Can I have a look at the supporting
documents?” Where’ s the contract that regulates our billing?” “Are
you sure we can’t add sixteen and a half hours to this bill?” “Hasn’t
this been done before? I recall a customer four years ago who…”
You might not be able to answer all his questions, so you must
simply decide how deep you want to go. You can always say, “That’ s
just the way it is; go back to work now.” But this is the worst thing
you can do, at least if you want to keep his confidence. The only
thing you’ve proven is that you haven’t kept track of the details.

[PAGE 187]
A s k  t h e  P e r s o n  t o  R e p e a t  W h a t  Y o u ’ v e  S a i d — a n d  F o l l o w  U p  S o o n
A f t e r w a r d s
When I hold seminars on leadership, the issue of giving feedback
is often  raised . It’s an extrem ely complicated subject, because we
allow our emotions to direct us when we give feedback (and receive
it!). But for Blues I give the same advice as I do for other colors: Ask
your Blue employee to repeat what you’ve agreed to. He needs to
duly acknowledge that he has seen and heard the same things you
have said.
It’s very likely that he’ll be able to repeat everything more or less
verbatim, but it’s just as likely that he hasn’t taken the message to
heart if you were vague in your delivery or too fixed on protecting
your relationsh ip. He understands that he should repeat what he
knows you want to hear him say. But this isn’t the same thing as him
believing your negative feedback was relevant.
The example I gave of the overdue project is a treacherous
hidden trap. Because a project that’s delivered to a customer only
has the value the customer  believes it to have. Quality  is of the
utmost importance. If we’re careless—according to a Blue’ s
standards—we won’t get more orders from that customer . What will
the lost revenue cost? So how can you value punctuality as being of
more importance than the product itself? At the logical level, a Blue
can make your objections seem nonsensical.
But if you know  that you’re right (not just that it feels right), follow
up afterwards to make sure that he’ s back on track.
Conclusion:  It’s difficult to criticize a perfectionist. He already
knows the best method, and he won’t change his opinion just
because you happen to have a fancier title on your business card.
So it’ s all about doing your homework very well.
You also need to remember that although it may be difficult to get
a Blue to respo nd to feedback, he has no problem criticiz ing others.
Remember , he sees all the mistakes everyone else makes and he
will likely point out your mistakes when you least expect it. Not
because he’ s being vindictive, but just because you’ve botched up.

[PAGE 188]
1 4
Who Gets Along and Why It Works
Group Dynamics at Their Finest
The short answer is that a group should consist of all colors to create
the best possible dynamic. In a perfect world, we would have an
equal number of each color . The Yellow comes up with a new idea,
the Red makes the decision,  the Green has to do all the work, and
the Blue evaluates and makes sure that the results are excellent. But
this isn’t the case. Not infrequently , we find Yellows in positions
better suited to Reds. Or, in the worst cases, they have been able to
talk their way into a job that actually requires Blue behavior . Indeed,
there are many examples of people who are sitting in the wrong
chairs, and part of the expla nation lies in the fact that they lack the
natural prerequisites to manage their jobs. Moreover , all this has to
do with what driving forces different people have. Different people
are motivated by different things, and it can cause them to move
away from their core behavior in specific situations. But that’s a
whole other topic and not something I cover in this book.
So how do you put your team together? Look at the picture on the
following page. Here you can see why certain combinations are
more suitable than others. If you’re  recruiting members to your team,
this may be a good place to start.

[PAGE 189]
As you can see, different colors work differently together . Again,
there are plenty of exceptions, but if no one in the group has any
knowledge of their behavior pattern some colors will naturally work
well together . For instance, it’s generally easier for two people to
work together if they have the same sense of tempo and work at a
similar speed.
Natural Combinations
If we look at the diagram above, we can see that Blue and Green
could be a suitable combination, without much of an effort from
either of them. They would certainly recognize themselves in each
other ’s ability to breathe calmly and to think twice before doing
something. Since both are introverts, each of them feels secure with
the other . It’s the same kind of energy . Neither of them will build
castles in the air, because they prefer to keep both feet on the
ground. They don’t stress but allow themselves to dive deeply into
things. Sure, they may find it difficult to make decisions, but the
decisions that they do make will probably be well thought out.

[PAGE 190]
Similarly , Red and Yellow work smoothly together , since they both
want to shoot from the hip and always move forward. Here we also
have the same kind of energy , only a different type. Both are
powerful and outgoing, and because both are verbal, they can easily
find the right words. Certainly , they’ll have a different focus in the
conversation, but the dialogue will still flow. Both set high goals and
think quickly . A team of Yellows and Reds will set a fast tempo, and
while they are both clear about what they want, they’ll motivate those
around them to achieve great things. The challenge probably lies in
the fact that a Red can perce ive a Yellow as being too talkative, but
since neither of them is a world-class listener , they’ll both just switch
off when it suits them.
Complementary Combinations
It also works to look at the other axis and make pairings based on
each color’s focus. Both Blues and Reds are task oriented. Reds are
certainly more interested in the result than in the process  itself, and
Blues are more concerned with the process and tend to ignore the
result—but they’re at least speaking the same language. Both
devote themselves to work and only spend limited time chatting
about football or home improvement—except maybe at lunchtime.
They would complement each other in a good way. If we liken this to
a car, a Red is the accelerator , while a Blue is the brake. Both are
needed in order to drive successfully . The trick is not to push both
pedals at the same time.
Similarly , there is some logic in placing a Green with a Yellow .
The tempo at which they work will be different, but both of them will
be curious about each other . Both believe that people are interesting
and important. While one likes to take it easy, the other likes having
fun. They’ll easily find a similar focus. The Green will allow the
Yellow to take as much space as he wants. One talks; the other
listens. It can work out well. In addition, Greens are good at calming
down the slightly hysterical Yellows, who sometimes have a hard
time staying grounded. Of course, there’ s a risk that they’ll fail to

[PAGE 191]
devote sufficient time to the work itself, but they will have a very
good time. People around them might feel that they’re only having a
good time and not actually delivering anything. As both can find it
difficult to say no, it might also be a good idea to avoid  entrusting
them with too much money .
Challenging Combinations
At the same time, there are two very complicated combinations. This
doesn’t mean that they won’t be able to work toget her, but it
definitely means that there are obstacles that need to be considered.
One possible solution is that both of them become more self-aware
in the ways that they work and interact with each other .
Look at the illustration on the following page.
The right column shows the things the person himself sees in his
profile. The left column shows how his exact opposite could perceive
him in less favorable circum stances. You’ve probably heard that a
person is a real bore, only to meet him and discover a very
interesting person with lots of exciting things to say. Who’ s right and
who’s wrong? It depends on whom you ask.
The problem lies in the interaction between each color and its
exact opposite. The positive image expresses how each profile
experiences himself. The negative image is an expression  of how he
can be experienced by others. W e all see dif ferent things.

[PAGE 192]
Genuine Problems
It would be quite a challenge to put a Red and a Green together
issues solve a problem. If the task depends on effective cooperation,
then issues will quickly arise. In the beginning, the Green is very
passive, especially when compared to the Red, who gets going even
before he’s heard the instructions. While the Greens think it’s
burdensome to have to do their part, the Reds have already started
in a hurry .
The Red will be very critical of the Green’ s constant moaning
about the amount of work. At the same time, the Green will think that
the Red is an aggressive son of a bitch who never listens.
Nevertheless, under favorable circumstances it may work out. In
general, a Green is prepared  to cooperate; that’s their strength. They
function well with many other people because they’re more
accommodating than demanding. So there can be a certain logic in
setting a Red with a Green. A Red likes giving orders, and a Green
is usually okay with receiving orders.
Based on Marston’ s theories (see page 227), the greatest
challenge of all is to ask a Yellow and a Blue to work together . If

[PAGE 193]
neither of them is aware of how their personalities work, there will be
friction from the outset. The Yellow dives into the task without the
slightest idea what to do or how to do it. He doesn’t read any
instructions, and he doesn’t listen long enough to find out what the
task is actuall y about. He’ll speak at great length about what an
exciting projec t they’ve been given. In the meantime, the Blue starts
reading and researching all the material available. He doesn’t say a
word but just sits there. More or less motionless—he thinks.
The Yellow, on the one hand, will consider him to be the most
uninspiring bore he has ever met. The Blue, on the other hand, will
only be disturbed by the Yellow’ s perpetual verbal barrage. He’ll
slowly begin to boil beneath the surface because of the incessant
buzzing around him. He believes that the Yellow is a frivolous
windbag, not deserving any attention whatsoever . And when the
Yellow finally realizes that he hasn’t won the Blue over to his side,
he’ll pull out all the stops and talk even more. In the worst  case, he’ll
try to charm the Blue, which will end up driving them to disaster .
They’ll sit in their own corne rs, with faces like they’ve tasted sour
milk, both mad for completely dif ferent reasons.
Self-awareness, my friend, is the solution.
Go Green!
It is not easy to read and interpret everyone. If a person only has one
color , then you won’t have any problems with him once you’ve
finished readin g this book. It will be obvious what you should do. A
person who is only Red or only Yellow is hard to miss. But even the
genuine Greens or Blues are quite easy to detect if you know what to
look for .
As I mentioned earlier , statistically speaking only about 5 percent
of the population has just one color that shows in their behavior .
Around 80 percent have two, and the rest have three. No one has
four, not with the tool that I use.
It’s also relatively easy to recognize people who have two colors.
Two color combinations normally follow any of the axes. So they are:

[PAGE 194]
Blue/Red, Red/Y ellow , Yellow/Green, or Green/Blue.
It does happen, of course, that purely opposite qualities can be
found in one and the same person. I’ve met lots of Yellow/Blue
people. There is nothing wrong with that; it’s just less common. But
what’ s really unusual is distinctly Red/Green profiles. Why this is the
case I don’t know .
On one occasion, I met a woman who was a middle manager
working for a company in the car industry . She was determined and
powerful in her manner , but, at the same time, she was extremely
caring. Her care and attention  for her employees was genu ine, and it
had some strange results. Among other things, she could lose her
temper very quickly . Her telling-of fs were legendary . Once she
realized this, however , she would do whatever she needed to soften
the effects of her actions and repair the damage. She felt genuinely
bad for having been hard on various individuals, but at the same
time she couldn’t control herself. This friction betwee n the two
conflicting colors in her behavior (Red and Green) meant that she
was very close to burnout.
People with three colors will always be more difficult to interpret.
If someone is very difficult to place on the map, it may very well be
because he has three colors. The situation will determine what his
behavior will be.
The best advice I can give if you really can’t analyze the person
you meet is to shut your mouth and start listening. Simply act Green
if you are unsure. People sometimes tells me that they can’t
understand a certain person  because he doesn’t do anything. But
even a person who is very passive exhibits some form of behavior .
And at this stage, you know what color is associated with someone
who doesn’t do much—that’ s a common Blue behavior .

[PAGE 195]
1 5
Written Communication
How to Evaluate Someone When Y ou Can’t Meet in Person
Many things are revealed in the way we write. Different colors have
distinct writing  styles; some take the time to express themselves,
while others keep brief. If you have the chance to read through a
longer writing sample that the person in question has written—a
report, a column, a letter , or a letter to the editor—you have lots to go
on. Very often it’s possible to detect a color in the written word. If
you’re a person of few words in speech, you can also be the same in
your writing. And vice versa.
If the only thing you have is an email, then you have to go on
what you have. Let’s say that you’re replying to a customer ’s
message. You want to prepa re yourself properly . You look carefully
at how his email reads. Is it factual? Is there any kind of personal
touch? Is it short and concise , or does it seem to have been written a
little spontaneo usly? All of these little details are important signals
that you can use to your advantage. As usual, there are plenty of
exceptions, but there are still patterns to be aware of.
Here are some examples of what this can look like.
From: kristian.jonsson@teamcommunication.com
To: Cina.cinasson@coco.net
Subject: Meeting
Meeting tomorrow morning at 11. BE PUNCTUAL!
-K

[PAGE 196]
What do you think? Is K screaming because he used  capital
letters? It’s not clear . It could be that he just wanted to stress that the
time for the meeting is important. Maybe he was rushing out
somewhere. It doesn’t matter to him that the person receiving the
email might be put off by the abrupt style and the caps lock. As
always, a Red can live with that. Get a grip! He just wanted to be
clear .
Your action: Reply instantly! Be short and concise. One way
might be to simply reply: “Okay .”
From: kristian.jonsson@teamcommunication.com
To: Cina.cinasson@coco.net
Subject: Meeting
Hello, Cina! What’s up? Were you at the game last night? I saw that Lasse
was there. He spilled his drink all over himself, and I thought that I would
never stop laughing! Check out the picture I put on Facebook. By the way, I
thought that we could sit down and chat about that customer tomorrow
morning before lunch if it works for you. Is eleven o’clock okay?
Ciao! Krille
From: kristian.jonsson@teamcommunication.com
To: Cina.cinasson@coco.net
Subject: Meeting
Oh, I forgot to attach the photo. Anyway, here it is.
Krille
Even in writing, a Y ellow expresses himself in a very spontaneous
and easygoing manner . He likes to share stories and keep things
personal. Note the social babble about poor Lasse and his drink. A
good laugh that must be highlighted to attract your attention.
Your reply? There isn’t any need to rush, but don’t fail to respond
or he’ll feel insecure. Be cordial as well. Don’t forget to thank him for
the funny picture and mention that you laughed at his story .…
From: kristian.jonsson@teamcommunication.com
To: Cina.cinasson@coco.net
Subject: Meeting

[PAGE 197]
I just wanted to remind you about the meeting tomorrow at eleven. Hope it
still works for you. I’m going to bring in some homemade cinnamon buns to
have with our coffee. Have a good one!
With kind regards, Kristian
A softer, more personal tone. Kristian had probably polished this
email appropriately , to make sure there was nothing controversial in
it. Rem inding people about meetings that were booked a long time
previously can be perceived as slightly offensive by some people, so
here we want to be certain that nothing can be misinterpreted.
And how do you respond to this pleasant email? Be perso nal and
benign in return. Express your thanks. You don’t have to say that it
will be great to have some cinnamon buns, but if you do it won’t do
any harm. Then remember to take it easy and not to stress at the
meeting.
From: kristian.jonsson@teamcommunication.com
To: Cina.cinasson@coco.net
Subject: Meeting
Good morning, Christina.
Ahead of tomorrow’s meeting with our client, I would appreciate it if you
could familiarize yourself with the necessary background information.
I’ve attached three documents relating to the issue.
Greetings,
Kristian Jonsson
+ 46704808080
Copy of dates and participants.xls
IT Strategy Update UGMT.doc
Flyer Template 27 Nov 2014.doc
The original invitation to the meeting was sent out a long time
ago, but you’ve already figured that out, right? An alarm was
probably set on the compu ter to send out a reminder about the
meeting a day beforehand. The text in the email is factual and
doesn’t contain  even a trace  of a personal touch. There  is a little
note reminding you that it’ s best to be well prepared.
What’ s the best way to answer this Blue email? Confirm that
you’ve received it along with the files. Say that you will get back to

[PAGE 198]
him if you have any questions after reading through the material.
And know that the sender assumes you’ll read the whole thing
carefully .

[PAGE 199]
1 6
What Makes Us as Mad as Hell?
Temperament Can Reveal Everything About a Person
At the end of this book, I will present you with a history lesson. It is
all about Hippocrates’ four temperaments, describing the same
differences that this book is all about.
It’s possible to draw conclusions about someone’ s behavior
based on his temperament. By “temper” or “temperament” I don’t just
mean what frustrates a person but rather how he reacts when
something unexpected happens. Another way of saying this might be
to talk about a person’ s disposition. It can be how he reacts to
changing circumstances and what sort of energy he has.
But yes, anger  is a good and exciting gauge by which to judge a
person’ s color . Moreover , it’s situational. What upsets one person
may not upset someone else in the least. By observing how
someone reacts when things go wrong, you can get some important
clues. Let me give you an example of a quick diagnosis.
What the hell…!!!
For the sake of simplicity , let’s compare different temperaments to
different types of drinking glasses. I would suggest a shot glass for a
Red temperament. “But,” you might say, “that little glass doesn’t hold
much.”
Indeed it doesn’t, and many Reds function like that, too. It doesn’t
take much for them to lose their temper and erupt. It could be about
traffic jams, missed phone calls, someone moving too slowly on the
escalator . Not getting their own way. That someone is just generally

[PAGE 200]
dense. Remem ber that of all the colors they are the ones most often
surrounded by idiots. For a Red, there are many reasons to be
irritated. A Red’s strength is that when they explode they rid
themselves of any anger or irritation they’ve been feeling. They erupt
briefly , but it doesn’t last. The shot glass may be quick to reach
capacity , but it doesn’t take long to empty it. They simply empty the
shot glass of anger and frustration and they’re back  to being
themselves. (I’m not referring to how those around a Red perceive
things.)
The advantage  is that, for all their raging, it usually subsides quite
quickly . A Red can rarely manage to be angry for long. He blurts out
what he wants to say, and then he moves on. Sure, he can leave
many confuse d people around him, but that’s their problem. He’s
finished with the episode. Then something deeply upsetting happens
again, and he just erupts. And again. And again.
Imagine that you pick up the shot glass and pour it out over your
desk. Not nice, but quite manageable. Y ou can always clean it up.
But remember the shot glass fills up just as quickly as it was
emptied. It will happen again. Many perceive a Red’s temperament
as totally unpredictable. It can erupt at any time.
Nevertheless, I don’t think it’s that unpredictable. If you know the
person in question, you probably also know what triggers his anger .
However , it’s important to know that a Red doesn’t consider
himself an angry person. He’s just given someone a piece of his
mind or maybe raised his voice at him. Again, it’s just a way of
communicating. But to a Green, it might seem that a Red is angry
even when he’s just sharing his opinion. So much is in the eye of the
beholder . It’s common that many people simply back off, to avoid
confronting the Red and triggering his anger . But by letting their
anger get the best of them all the time, Reds miss out on a lot of
feedback.
“I Am Very Upset! Do You Even Hear What I’m
Saying?”

[PAGE 201]
Even the cheerful Yellow loses his temper: Don’t let anyo ne tell you
otherwise. Although Yellows  generally have a sunny , optimistic
disposition, they have a temper as well. Like Reds, they are active,
perceptive people. This means that they have a lot to react to. And if
you’re quick-thinking and your tongue sometimes gets away from
you, well then, things can happen. What comes out your face’ s front
door isn’t always well thought out.
Because Yellow s are very expressive and emotional at the same
time, you’ll know in advance when the mercury starts rising. An
observant person won’t have any problem noticing that a Yellow is
on the verge of bursting. The look in his eyes intensifies; his
gestures become impetuous; his voice is raised. All this happens,
but it happens gradually .
If the Red temperament is like a shot glass, then we can liken the
Yellow temperament to an everyday drinking glass. It holds more and
it’s easier to see when it’s full. The level rises a little at a time, and if
you’re paying attention you’ll have no problem observing this as it
happens.
Now, if we take the tumbler of milk and pour it out all over your
desk what’s the result? It will be a lot messier and much soggier than
when we poured out the shot glass, right? Many important papers
are destroyed, and it requires more than a single paper towel to dry it
all up.
But we can still handle the situation. Even this tempera mental
outburst can be managed without too many serious complications.
There are also advantages in a Yellow’ s temperament. He’ll feel
guilty that he laid into someone close to him: colleague, family
member , neigh bor, or maybe even you. So he’ll make an extra effort
to be kind the next time you meet. He’ll have an uneasy conscience,
something a Red wouldn’t be able to comprehend.
If a person happens to be a combination of Red and Yellow ,
things can get tough. In this case, there’ s a lot of ego in the room,
and you won’t quite know what’ s happening.

[PAGE 202]
Depending on the driving forces and motivational factors the
individual may have, he can assert his own position almost to the
point of absurd ity. Genuine Yellows can let their egos get in the way
most of the time. The advantage, however , is that due to their bad
memory , they don’t hold grudges for long. They quickly forget that
there were any problems, an ability that can make Greens  and Blues
find Y ellows to be a little bit too exciting.
Beware the Fury of a Patient Man. Beware Indeed.
Do you recognize this old saying? The person who coined it probably
had a Green in mind. You may never have seen a Green lose his
temper . It may very well be that your good friend, the friendly and
gentle pal you’ve never had a serious argument with, hasn’t ever
shown even a shred of bad temper .
Does that mean that this is a person who can’t get angry? Not at
all. It just means that instead of turning his temper outwards, it’s
oriented in another direction. Inwards.
I would liken a Green’ s temp erament to a fifty-gallon beer barrel.
Can you imagine how many shot glasses it would take to fill it? We
could fill, fill, and fill even more before we even start covering the
bottom of it. Many Greens function like that. They receive and accept
without objecting. This is very much connected to their desire to
avoid conflict but also to their inability to say no. They simply agree
because it’ s easier that way .
Does this mean that Greens  don’t have their own opinion s? Not
at all; they have just as many opinions about things as anyone else.
They just don’t talk about their opinions. And this is often the
problem. They fill the barrel. Week in and week out, a Green accepts
one perceived injustice after the other—note that I said “perceived.”
It may take several years before the barrel is full.
Now take this barrel, lift it up, and pour the contents out over your
desk.
What happens ? Everything will be washed away . The water in the
barrel will not only wash away everything on your desk away; even

[PAGE 203]
the desk itself and you along with it will go out with the flood, too.
There’ s no stopping it.
“You said that I didn’t finish the project on time? Really? Really?!
Last week, you said that I didn’t do it well enough. Now let me tell
you this: A year ago you prom ised me a new office, and it still hasn’t
materialized. And when I was hired here, back in 1997, you said the
same thing, and now let me tell you…”
Everything has to come out. Just make sure that you’re not the
spark that sets it all of f.
The problem is large-scale. Greens don’t release any anger or
frustration but control their emotions so as not to create trouble or
stand out. But they feel and experience just as much as everyone
else does. They just lack the natural tools to release everything. But
we can help by becoming facilitators. We can ask questions, invite
them in, and look for signals. Look at their body languag e to see if
there are signs of disapprova l. Create a healthy environment around
a Green so that he becomes comfortable enough to say what he
thinks so that he doesn’t have to continually compromise his
position. Otherwise, he will turn all his frustration inwards. And we
know what this kind of stress can do to a person.
I have my own private theory , which I certainly cannot prove
scientifically , but I suspect that this may be the main reason why
Greens suffer burnout. They carry anxiety , anguish, and even anger
for so long that it eventually makes them ill. It’s a noticeable problem
that should be taken seriously .
A Complaint a Day
During an extremely stressf ul period in my earlier career in the
banking sector , I once heard a comment about a Blue. All of us were
working every  day and night, and many of us were showing the
stress. Frustration was hanging in the air .
Our credit controller was in the middle of the whole thing. Nothing
got to her. She never even acted stressed. Her face was absolutely
indecipherable, and her gestures were as limited and moderate as

[PAGE 204]
always. While the rest of us ate our lunch on the go, she took her full
sixty minutes and ate in peace and quiet … it was as if nothing could
disturb her peace.
Then one of my Yellow-Red colleagues said, “She’ s not normal.
She doesn’t have any feelings in her body .”
Back then, it sounded logical to me, but when you think about it, it
can’t be true. Blues simply have less need to communicate than
Greens. So they simply don’t do it. Some things are turned inwards
even for Blues. Those who are quick thinkers may wond er if Blues
run the risk of burnout just as much as Greens do. Not at all. They
have a system to keep stress under control.
Metaphorically speaking, Blues have as big a beer barrel as
Greens have, but there is one crucial difference: At the bottom of the
barrel, there’ s a handy little tap. This tap gives a Blue a valve to
release part of the contents of the barrel. He can regulate the
pressure whenever he wishes to.
Moreover , the tap leaks. It’s not tight enough to create a perfect
seal, and small drops drip most of the time. A Blue’ s dissatisfaction
comes out in the form of tiny grumblings.
“Just look. Someone has misplaced the pen again! Typical! Now
I’ll have to finish this off myse lf. As usual, I get the most boring task.
There’ s no structure here. T ypical.”
And so he goes on. His pinpricks affect those around him, but
what they hear all the time is just a muttering trumpet. The embers
don’t fan into a fire. We interpret it as a perpetual whining, but the
discontent is real. And because a Blue isn’t sufficiently active to
instigate something, he’ll argue about things rather than doing
something about them. It’s all based on complaints that others
should see what he sees, that he doesn’t have any authority to act,
or that he’s simply in a bad mood. But for him, this is a great way of
keeping the pressure under control. So the barrel will never need to
be emptied out over somebody’ s desk, and thus serious
catastrophes are avoided.

[PAGE 205]
The way to manage his nagg ing is to ask counterquestions. Ask
for conc rete examples. Ask for suggestions for improveme nt. It may,
in fact, be the case that the Blue has solved the probl em that is
plaguing him, but that he needs a straight question in order for him to
step forward and suggest a solution.
What Can You Do About the Fact That People Don’t
Get Pissed Off in the Same Way?
With these simple observati ons in mind, you can quickly form an
idea of what type of person you’re dealing with. Pay attention to how
he reacts under stress and pressure.
But, at the same time, remember that no system is perfect . These
are only indications, and they apply only to individual colors.
Besides, as I wrote previously , different situations can give rise to
completely different forms of conduct. Generally speaking, the more
important a particular thing is for a certain person, the stronger his
reaction will be.
See for yourself. If someone insults your neighbor , you might
think it was unfair. But you don’t make a big scene out of it. However ,
if someone were to insult your husband or wife, you would be
absolutely furious. That’ s just one example. There are many levels
and degrees of dif ference to reflect on.

[PAGE 206]
1 7
Stress Factors and Energy Thieves
What Is Stress?
Anger is one thing. Stress is another . Sometimes one is a
consequence of the other , but not always. Some people become
angry because of stress; others become stressed because of anger .
When we speak about stress, we often mean the feeling  of having
too much to do and too little time to do it. There’ s not enou gh time to
do everything at work and then on top of that factor in the time
needed to go to the gym, meet with friends, spend time with family ,
do various kinds of recreational activities, oh, and maybe sleep.
However , the stress that makes us truly suffer is often due to
things apart from a lack of time. If you feel pressure and have high
expectations about what you will do and how you are meant to be,
you can become stressed, even if you aren’t really pressed for time.
Pressure, demands, and expectations create stress and can
make you feel self-critical and powerless. You may find it difficult to
sleep or may feel physical pain in your body . Simply put, the feeling
of stress arises when we experience greater demands and
expectations than we can cope with.
Different People React Differently to Stress: What a
Surprise!
Seriously , though, all of us react differently to stress. Different people
can experience the same event in different ways, and a person can
experience similar events differently at different times. The things

[PAGE 207]
you have been  through in the past and how you are feeling right now
all have an ef fect on how you act and react.
If you’r e well rested and feeling fine, you could experience a
tough week at work as an invigorating challenge, despite your heavy
workload. But if you’re tired and feeling down on yourself, you may
experience the same week as something horrible and demoralizing.
How does your color affect your stress? It says nothing about
your stress threshold (that is, how much stress you can bear). But it
can say something about what  stresses you and how you’ll react to
stress. Previously , I mentioned the concept of driving forces—
whatever forces motivate me to get up out of bed every morning,
dash to work, and go the extra mile. This book doesn’t deal with this
dimension, but it’s easy to see that we become stressed  when we
feel that we’re spending too much time on the wrong things.
Once you’ve understood what the most important stress factors in
your life are, you’ll be better equipped to avoid them when possible.
If you’re a manager responsible for a number of people and you
know their behavior profiles, you can avoid the worst pitfalls. A great
deal of stress can be avoided if you know how. And you can retain
the group’ s productivity .
The rest of the chapter is written with an element of irony , and I
urge you to read it in that way .
Stress Factors for Reds
If you would like to stress out a Red, you can try one of the following
to lower his self-confidence.
T a k e  E v e r y  F o r m  o f  A u t h o r i t y  A w a y
Not being involved in decision-making is really difficult for a Red.
He always believes that he has better ideas and so he also believes
that he should be the one in charge of the project.
A c h i e v e  N o  R e s u l t s  W h a t s o e v e r
“If we’re not making immediate headway , then all our work has
been a waste.”  Such an insight can trigger severe stress reactions in

[PAGE 208]
a Red, and those around him should be on their guard. He’ll look for
scapegoats.
E l i m i n a t e  A n y  K i n d  o f  C h a l l e n g e
If everything is too easy, it becomes boring. Red behavior hinges
on one thing: the ability to handle problems and difficult challenges.
If there  are no problems to solve, then Reds will lack stimulation.
They’ll become passive, believing that they have absolutely nothing
to do. They can slow down  the pace, and this can be difficult to
reverse.
W a s t e  T i m e  a n d  R e s o u r c e s  a n d  W o r k  a s  I n e f f i c i e n t l y  a s  P o s s i b l e
Just sitting around doing nothing is a waste of time. Not that this
is necessarily what we’re actually doing, but, in the mind of a Red, if
you don’t get the maximum productivity out of your time, it’s wasteful
and particularly stressful from a managerial perspective. He is
probably evaluated on the organization’ s efficiency .
M a k e  S u r e  T h a t  E v e r y t h i n g  B e c o m e s  a  R o u t i n e
Mundane and repetitive tasks are the kiss of death for a Red. It’s
simply boring. Reds lose their concentration and will find something
else to do. Routine work is not what they’re good at. They ’re lousy at
details, and they know it. Someone else needs to take care of the
dull, routine work, because a Red believes that he has a better
understanding of the big picture.
M a k e  a  B u n c h  o f  S t u p i d  M i s t a k e s
Mistakes are one thing, but stupid mistakes, well, that’s
something completely different. It’s so overwhelmingly unnecessary .
If a Red believ es his colleagues are brainless, he gets crazy: “Why
don’t they understand what they’re supposed to do? How hard can it
be?”
G i v e  H i m  N o  C o n t r o l  o v e r  O t h e r s
A Red’s need for control can be extensive. It’s not about
controlling facts and details. They want to control people. What they

[PAGE 209]
do, how they do it, and so on. Without this control, a Red gets very
frustrated.
T e l l  H i m  R e g u l a r l y  t o  C o o l  D o w n  o r  t o  L o w e r  H i s  V o i c e
They get crazy when people  say that they’re angry when  they’re
not. They will always be a little more hot-tempered than average, but
this doesn’t actually mean that they’re angry . And it’s precisely this
accusation that can get them to become angry—really angry .
What Does a Red Do When He Gets Stressed and
Feels Pressured?
He blames everyone else. As a Red is often surrounded by idiots, it’ s
easy for him to single out scapegoats. And he can easily overdo
things when he wants to take someone to task for having made a
mess of things. Be aware! That’s my advice to you, because you’ll
feel the sting of his wrath.
Reds are always more demanding than other colors. They expect
a lot from themselves, and they expect a lot from you. When under
stress, they’re also excessively demanding and driven—m uch more
than usual.
The Red will shut out his other colleagues. He becomes closed,
burrows into the task at hand, and works even harder . Remember
that his anger and frustration  is lurking just beneath the surface, so
please be careful about what you do in his presence.
Can I Help Reds to Manage Their Stress?
If you have the authority to give a direct order , the answe r is simple:
Ask them to get a hold of themselves. It actually works. Another way
to make it easier for Reds in stressful situations is to send them
home and tell them to do some physical exercise—anything to burn
some of that frustrated, restless energy . Send them to a place where
they can run in some kind of competition, spending their energy on

[PAGE 210]
winning somet hing that will be of no importance to the group. When
they come back, most of their aggression will have dissipated.
Stress Factors for Yellows
If for any reaso n, you would like to get a Yellow to feel stress, try one
of the following to get him of f balance.
P r e t e n d  H e ’ s  I n v i s i b l e
You remembe r a Yellow’ s driving impulse, right? “Look  at me!
Here I am!” If you want to get him off balance, simply make him feel
invisible. If he’ s not visible, then he doesn’t exist. He feel ignored and
overlooked, and this is guaranteed to cause stress.
B e c o m e  V e r y  S k e p t i c a l
Any person manifesting lots of skepticism is very negative,
something that stresses Yellows. They want to see the positive and
the light and consider even everyday realists to be prophets of
doom. Pessimism and negativity effectively kill Yellows’ enthusiasm
and cause them to feel tense.
S t r u c t u r e  W o r k  a s  M u c h  a s  P o s s i b l e
Just like Reds, Yellows shun routine, repetitive tasks and jam-
packed schedules. They happily create schedules for others, but
they can’t follow them themse lves. Force them into one of your plans
and you’ll see how your Y ellow friends will begin to unravel.
I s o l a t e  H i m  f r o m  t h e  R e s t  o f  t h e  G r o u p
For a Yellow , the absence of someone to talk to is perhaps the
worst thing ever. It’s the end of the world. Because they need to talk,
there must be someone there to listen. Being trapped in an office
space with only a desk for company is a punishment worse than
death. It’ s like being deported to Siberia.
M a k e  C l e a r  T h a t  I t ’ s  I n a p p r o p r i a t e  t o  J o k e  a t  W o r k
“No joking around and no sense of humor? Is this a funeral
parlor?” I once got exactly  that comment from a Yellow who

[PAGE 211]
discovered that consultants didn’t have time to monkey about. She
was very stressed out by all the seriousness and left before her
probation period was over .
P u s h  a  Y e l l o w  t o  T h i n k  C a r e f u l l y  B e f o r e h a n d — T w i c e
Suppressing a Yellow’ s spontaneity is like holding down the lid on
a sauce pan when the milk is boiling over. It simply does n’t work. It
creates a terrible mess, and everyone gets involved when  Yellows—
loudly and intensely—invite everyone else into their stress spiral.
Remember that a Yellow’ s stress will always be noticed. Don’t
believe otherwise.
C o n t i n u o u s l y  S q u a b b l e  a n d  F u s s  A b o u t  I n s i g n i f i c a n t  T h i n g s
Having to face incessant confrontations is exhausting. This is
something of a paradox, because Yellows aren’t afraid of conflict like
Greens. But if there’ s too much bickering, it will disrupt their desire
for fun and positivity , which causes stress. They can cope with
squabbling, but when it becomes too much, Yellows won’t be at the
top of their game and they lose their usual luster .
T r y  a  L i t t l e  P u b l i c  H u m i l i a t i o n
A Yellow  who has been given  negative feedback in the presence
of other s won’t be a pleasan t sight to behold. It’s enoug h to make
him never speak to you again. Moreover , he’ll also become
incredibly defensive, and you’ll achieve nothing at all.
What Does a Yellow Do When He Gets Stressed and
Feels Pressured?
Be prepared for the fact that he’ll draw attention to himself even
more than usual. His ego makes it impossible for him not to seek out
more attention and affirmatio n, since he has to compensate for the
negative feelin gs of stress. This means that he’ll actively look for
attention, which makes him feel better . The risk is that he’ll talk too
much and force himself into the center of everything.

[PAGE 212]
Maybe you thought that this wasn’t possible, but he also runs the
risk of becoming excessively and unrealistically optimis tic. You’ve
never experien ced a real challenge until you’ve tried to cope with a
truly stressed-out Yellow . He’ll come up with plans that are so wild
and outlandish  that not even he can believe them. This is just a
natural coping mechanism for him.
Can I Help Yellows to Manage Their Stress?
Let a Yellow organize a party . He urgently needs to meet people in
social contexts. He can sink very deep into his own misery if he
remains under  stress for too long. When things are at their worst,
suggest a pub crawl, a party , or why not just a simple barbeque? It
doesn’t need to be fancy , but make sure he gets to enjoy himself for
a while. Also, make sure that it’ s fun!
Stress Factors for Greens
If you, for any reason, would like to get a Green to feel stress, I
propose the following unpleasant things.
T a k e  E v e r y  F o r m  o f  S e c u r i t y  A w a y  f r o m  H i m
Give him tasks that he’s never done before without explaining
anything whatsoever to him. But, at the same time, expect perfect
implementation. Leave him alone in meetings with people who place
unreasonable demands on him. Don’t support him when things heat
up in a conver sation. Send an angry Red to rant at him. The stress
will soon follow .
L e a v e  L o t s  o f  L o o s e  E n d s
Unfinished tasks and loose ends are deeply disturbing. Greens
like to know how things fit together , and when they don’t understand
how the process works it won’t go well. Unfinished projects—things
that have been started but are drawn out without any end in sight—
really mess things up for Greens. This is why Yellows are
phenomenal at causing stress for Greens.

[PAGE 213]
H a n g  A r o u n d  H i m  C o n s t a n t l y
If a Green doesn’t get his private space, if there’ s nowhere he can
withdraw from the world, he gets very stressed. He likes other
people, of course, but he needs to be alone with himself also. If this
isn’t possible, then he can’t think anymore.
M a k e  L i g h t n i n g - F a s t  C h a n g e s  a n d  U n e x p e c t e d  C h a n g e s  o f  D i r e c t i o n
This is the specialty of Reds and Yellows. Quick decisions that
they don’t always explain. Greens are miserable when they’re forced
into making unexpected and rapid changes, and they often respond
by ending up in a state of absolute indifference. The worst kind of
change is when a Green gets an order in the morning and just as he
begins to reflect on how he will do it a counterorder comes.
A s k  H i m  “ W o u l d  Y o u  B e  S o  G o o d  a s  t o  R e d o  t h e  W h o l e  T h i n g  f r o m
B e g i n n i n g  t o  E n d ? ”
Having to redo a task is synonymous with failure. If something
must be redone, it can only be because your work wasn’t good
enough the first time. In other words, negative feedback. By
extension, this means that you’re not good enough as a person,
which, of course, is extremely stressful.
T e l l  a  G r e e n ,  “ L o o k  H e r e !  W e  C a n ’ t  A g r e e  o n  A b s o l u t e l y  E v e r y t h i n g . ”
Disagreements in a work group or in the family inevitably lead to
stress. Only troublemakers enjoy conflict. Friction in the most
impor tant group, the family , is particularly serious. A Green won’t
know what he should do.
P u s h  H i m  i n t o  t h e  S p o t l i g h t
Under no circu mstances will Greens want to take cente r stage
when they’re in larger group s. Groups of more than three people
would be cons idered large groups unless the Green knew everyone
very well. If you force a Gree ns into such a situation, he’ll just stare
at his feet. Everyone can see how uneasy he is, and the rest of the
group will also be stressed. Not good.

[PAGE 214]
What Does a Green Do When He Gets Stressed and
Feels Pressured?
He becomes very reserved and almost cold. His body language
becomes rigid and closed, and if you’re the one who triggered his
stress he won’t have anything to do with you. Some Greens can
exhibit strong apathy . They become cold and unsympathetic even
towards people whom, in normal circumstances, they care very
much about.
They also become very hesitant and uncertain. Stress makes
Greens insecu re and afraid of making mistakes. It can be at work but
also at home. If a child gets sick, a Green becomes passi ve and just
looks on, because he’s afraid of doing the wrong thing. He’ll also
internalize the blame for the situation and may become completely
closed.
At work, it may be slightly different. It depends. Many Gree ns end
up in a rut of obstinacy or stubbornness, provoking those around
them by refusing to change  anything. Even when they see that a
particular meth od is not working well, they can refuse to act. It
seems strange , but the typical Green stubbornness gets the upper
hand and prevents them from doing anything.
Can I Help Greens to Manage Their Stress?
Allow them to do nothing. Give them free time for things like
gardening, sleep, or other forms of relaxation. Maybe something like
sending them off to a movie—not with a large group of people, but
possibly on their own—or giving them a good book that takes two
days to read. They don’t really want to do anything. Let them do
nothing until the stress subsid es. Then they’ll be back to their normal
selves.
Stress Factors for Blues

[PAGE 215]
If you, for any reason, would you like to get a Blue to feel stress, just
upset every one of his calculations.
T e l l  H i m ,  “ Y o u  D o n ’ t  K n o w  W h a t  Y o u ’ r e  T a l k i n g  A b o u t . ”
You may think that Blues don’t take criticism personally , but if they
believe that the criticism is untrue and unfounded, it can be very hard
on them. Not because they’re afraid of conflict, or that your
relationship will suffer, but because their sense of perfection is being
besmirched.
H a v e  t h e  M a n a g e m e n t  T e a m  M a k e  a  S p o n t a n e o u s  D e c i s i o n
A Blue is often okay with change, because he doesn’t ever
consider anything completely perfect. But he needs to know the
motivations behind the change. If it’s not in the plan, then it’s
unplanned, and a lack of planning indicates poor structure—not
good. Inevitably , this leads to headaches.
T e l l  H i m ,  “ T h i s  C o u l d  B e  R i s k y  o r  U n c e r t a i n ,  b u t  W e ’ r e  G o i n g  t o  G o  A h e a d
A n y w a y . ”
There’ s a certain amount of risk in everything. A Blue sees risks
everywhere. If a Red were to say that jumping from a plane without a
parachute is a huge risk, a Blue would say that it’s risky to buy a new
lawn mower . You never really know what can happen. And the faster
things go, the greater the risks become.
S u r p r i s e  H i m  w i t h  S o m e t h i n g  l i k e  “ Y o u r  I n - l a w s  A r e  C o m i n g  O v e r
U n a n n o u n c e d !  F a n t a s t i c ! ”
It’s a matter of order and structure, of working at a relaxe d pace
or renovating the kitchen according to a clearly established plan. If
half the family were to drop in all of a sudden, it would upset
everything. You should never try to surprise a Blue. Since he may
not have communicated his own plans completely , you can create
quite a problem.
S a y ,  “ W h o o p s a d a i s y ,  W h a t  H a p p e n e d  H e r e ? ”
Mistakes are made by blockheads and careless people. Blues
don’t make mistakes, so when everyone else makes a mess of

[PAGE 216]
things and disrupts his plans a Blue might simply close the door and
refuse to listen. He doesn’t want to hear that the project has crashed;
he just wants to keep doing his part—even if that task no longer
makes any sense.
T e l l  H i m ,  “ F o r g e t  A b o u t  t h e  B u r e a u c r a c y .  L e t ’ s  I n n o v a t e ! ”
“Don’t you have any imagin ation? We have to be a bit more
flexible here.” This is a great way to get a Blue to lose his footing at
work. People who break the rules and go against the regulations are
to be regarded with suspicion , and you need to keep them on a short
leash. If a Blue realizes that he’s in the hands of an organization that
pays no attention whatsoever to proper procedures, he can show
considerable resistance.
R e m i n d  H i m ,  “ W e  S i m p l y  N e e d  t o  T a k e  B i g g e r  R i s k s . ”
A variation on the precedin g point. Right is right, and proper
preparation is the be-all and end-all, the Alpha and Ome ga. It even
says so in a book. So when a Blue can’t prepare himself in his
(sometimes extremely cumbersome) way, it triggers stress. He’s the
opposite of spontaneous, and you simply can’t force a Blue to
respond to a situation before  he’s had time to acquaint himself with
the subject. He’ll have so many reservations he won’t be any use.
S u r r o u n d  H i m  w i t h  O v e r l y  E m o t i o n a l  P e o p l e
Nope. Sloppy sentimentality is downright unpleasant. It’s messy
and awkward, and a Blue doesn’t like it. Logic is what counts, and if
you overlook this, he’ll find it very trying. He’ll make himself scarce,
and he’ll never forget that you’re an overly emotional person who
doesn’t use your brain in the same way he uses his.
What Does a Blue Do When He Gets Stressed and
Feels Pressure?
He becomes excessively pessimistic. Oh yes. It actually gets worse
than usual. Suddenly everyth ing becomes pitch black, and he falls
into a pit of despair . Letharg y is common, and nothing is of interest

[PAGE 217]
anymore. Gloom and doom will rain down on all of us. He also gets
unbearably pedantic. When they feel stress, many people increase
their pace in order to compensate. Not a Blue. He stomps on the
brakes. Now isn’t the time for making any mistakes. Those around
him can expect constant criticism. He’ll suddenly point out every little
mistake he observes—and there are quite a few. He might also
become an unbearable know-it-all.
Can I Help Blues to Manage Their Stress?
They need privacy . They must be given time and space to think.
They want to analyze the situation and understand the connections,
and they need to be given time to do just that. If you give them
space, they will come back—eventually . But if they fall too deeply
into a funk, you may need to of fer them more proactive help.
Conclusion:  What can we learn from studying different people
under stress? When under stress an individual’ s normal conduct and
behavior are reinforced and exaggerated. A Red becomes even
tougher and more aggressiv e towards those around him, a Yellow
becomes more sulky and unstructured, a Green becomes even more
passive and noncommittal than usual, and a Blue can become
completely closed and split hairs so thin that they’re not even visible
to the naked eye.
The most important thing is to avoid stressing people
unnecessarily . Of course you knew that already , but it can be helpful
to understand what actually causes stress for each profile. To push a
Red is not as stressful as pushing a Green or a Blue. On the
contrary , you have to push a Red for him to bounce back. If
everything were to go smoothly , he would just get bored.
The situation, your profile, the time of day, the level of work, the
group, the weather—lots of things determine stress in our lives. But if
you pay attention, it will work out perfectly .

[PAGE 218]
1 8
A Short Reflection Through History
People Have Always Been like This
The Background to Everything You’ve Read So Far
This chapter explains how I arrived at the research that forms the
basis of the information in this book. If you’re not interested in
history , or references, or research, or things that take time from your
otherwise full life, you can skip this chapter . For everybody else—a
long time ago …
In all cultures, there has always been a need to categorize
people. When the Stone Age period was over and we became more
reflective as people, we discovered that all over the world people
were dif ferent. What a surprise.
But how different are people really? And how have those
differences been described? There are probably as many methods
as there are cultures on earth. But I’ll share some examples.
T h e  G r e e k s
Hippocrates, who lived four centuries before Christ, is considered
the father of medicine. Unlike many other physicians of that time, he
wasn’t superstitious. He believed that disease originated in nature
and didn’t come from the gods. For example, Hippocrate s believed
that epilepsy was caused by a blockage in the brain. Nowadays this
is common knowledge, but back then it was revolutionary .
Humoral patho logy, or the theory of the four humors or four bodily
fluids, has to do with the four temperaments. According to

[PAGE 219]
Hippocrates, our temperament is the fundamental way we react. It’s
our behavior or our natural frame of mind. Our temperament controls
our behavior .
Hippocrates believed that your health is good when the four
humors—blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm—are in balance.
When we vomit, cough, or sweat, for example, the body is trying to
rid itself of one or more of these substances.
The word chloe  comes from Greek and means “yellow bile.”
Therefore, a choleric person is controlled by yellow bile or the liver.
Fiery and temp eramental, choleric people sometimes frighten those
around them with their powerful ways. “Choleric” can be translated
as “hot-blooded.”
The Latin word sanguis  means “blood.” A sanguine person is
controlled by the blood, by the heart. Creative and happy-go-lucky ,
he spreads positive vibes around him. Full of blood and therefore
optimistic and cheerful, he has an airy manner . A synonym for a
sanguine person is an optimist.
A phlegmatic person gets his influences from the brain. “Phlegm”
means nothing more than mucus. Mucus is viscous, which

[PAGE 220]
symbolizes a phlegmatic person’ s temperament. A phlegmatic
person is sluggish and slow in movement.
Finally , a melancholic person has an excess of black bile—the
Greek melaina chloe  simply means “black bile,” found in the spleen
—and is therefore often perceived as melancholic and gloomy . A
common synonym for a melancholic person is a pessimist.
And there we have Hippocrates and his theories in a nutshell.
T h e  A n c i e n t  P e o p l e  w i t h  a n  E y e  f o r  C o l o r :  T h e  A z t e c s
The Aztecs were a powerful people who lived in Central Mexico
from the fourteenth century to the sixteenth century . They are known
for their incredibly advanced civilization and impressive temples.
When they tried to divide people into different categories, they
used somethin g they knew well—the four elements: fire, air, earth,
and water . To this day, the four elements are used to describe
different frames of mind, but nobody really knows if the Aztecs were
the first to actually come up with this idea. But we do know for a fact
that they used this idea, because they left carvings illustrating this
approach.
Fire people were exactly as it sounds: fiery, explosive, a bit
hotheaded. They were warrior types who took to the sword to get
their own way . Leaders.
Air people were different. They were also determined but
considerably more easygoing. They swept in like a captivating wind,
kicking up a little dust in the process.
Earth people worked for the village, for the collective. They had to
exemplify stability and security . They were there to create long-
lasting things, to build for the future.

[PAGE 221]
What about water people? Water was an element the Aztecs had
respect for. Water can crush everything in its path, but you can also
bottle it—if you know how to do it. Quiet and secure, water people
observed everything that was happening.
As you can see, these divisio ns bear quite a resemblance to the
theories propo unded by Hippocrates—they’re only different names
for the same thing.
W i l l i a m  M o u l t o n  M a r s t o n
William Moulton Marston created a systolic blood pressure test
that was used in an attempt to detect fraud. The discove ry resulted
in the modern  lie detector . But Marston was also the author of
essays in popular psychology . In 1928 he published his work
Emotions of Normal People,  in which he investigated the differences
in the behavio r patterns of healthy people. Earlier , both Jung and
Freud had published studies involving mentally unstable people, but
Marston was a kind of pioneer who provided the foundations for what
became known  as the DISA  model, the model that is the basis for
this book. A few years after discovering Marston’ s work (in the

[PAGE 222]
1950s), Walter Clarke developed the DISA concept based on
Marston’ s observations. As you’ve seen, this is a model used to
categorize the different types  of human behavior . His work has been
an endless source of valuab le insights about behavior and human
interactions, but it has not been without its critics. Howev er, a great
deal of work has been done since Marston’ s days, and over the
years many other people have been involved in fine-tuning the DISA
tool.
Marston found a way to demonstrate how people were different.
He noted distinct differences between personalities, which formed
the basis for the model used in this book. Nowadays we use the
following divisions:
•  Dominance produces activity in an antagonistic
environment.
•  Inspiration produces activity in a favorable environment.
•  Submission produces passivity in a favorable environment.
•  Complian ce produces passivity in an antagon istic
environment.
The four letters D, I, S, and C (Dominance, Inspiration,
Submission, and Compliance) form the acronym of the DISC profile
that is used throughout the world. Marston used the word
“compliance”; however , in this book I render this as “analytic ability ,”
as that better describes the type of individuals.
The dominance  trait in any given individua l relates to how he
approaches problems and deals with challenges.
Inspiration  refers to a person who likes to influence others. A
person with this trait will always be able to convince others. In simple
terms, you could say that dominance is about acting, and inspiration
is about interacting.

[PAGE 223]
The degree of stability  is measured primarily by how receptive an
individual is to change. A strong need for stability means a person is
resistant to change, while someone who enjoys change will have a
lower need for stability . This leads, of course, to a number of specific
behavior patterns—like a nostalgic belief in the long-lost “good old
days” for instance.
Finally , analytic ability  shows how willing someone is to follow
rules and regulations. Of course, this also produces certain
characteristics that are interrelated. Here we find those who can’t
accept that things go wrong. Quality is important.
You’ve probably noticed that, regardless of whether it’s a product
of mode rn psychology or the ancient Aztecs in Latin America, these
behavoral traits are all associated with the same color . The colors
aren’t critical; it’s only a way to make it easier for those who aren’t
familiar with the system to make sense of the profiles. As a
consultant, I’ve trained people in this topic for twenty years, and I’ve
found that the colors facilitate learning.
Marston finished researching this topic sometime in the 1930s.
Many others have used his research and developed a tool that,
according to the most recent data, has been used by nearly 50
million people for the past thirty-five years. For example, the

[PAGE 224]
American Bill Bonnstetter made invaluable achievements in creating
definitive tools that help analyze the whole individual. In the United
States, a company TTI Success Insights (ttisuccessinsights.com)
offers a comprehensive analysis tool.
But it’s always helpful to remember that though in theory there’ s
no difference between the concept on the page and the practice, in
the real world there’ s a big dif ference indeed.
I’ve described the four main traits that Marston pointed out, but
remember that most of us are a combination of two colors.

[PAGE 225]
1 9
Voices from Real Life
The book you are holding in your hands is a transl ation from
Swedish of the fourth edition of Surrounded by Idiots: How to
Understand Those Who Cannot Be Understood.  When the Swedish
edition was published, about fifteen thousand people in Sweden read
it. I wrote this book because for many years in various context at
training courses, lectures, et cetera, people always asked me,
“Where can we read more about this system?” Up until now, the
answer has always been nowhere. Then I wrote this book , and now
you’ve read it.
As a writer , I always want to know what people think about what I
have written. Because I also write fiction, I know how hearing the
truth can be like an electric shock, but at the same time, I like to
challenge myself. So, I interviewed four people with entirely different
profiles, asking  their views about the system itself but also about
how they see their everyday lives—based on the color they have. As
you read, pay attention to how they answer the questions (not just to
what they say). You can learn just as much from how they respond
as you can from the responses themselves.
H e l e n a
C E O  o f  a  P r i v a t e  C o m p a n y  w i t h  A p p r o x i m a t e l y  F i f t y  E m p l o y e e s .  M o s t l y  R e d ,
W i t h o u t  A n y  G r e e n  o r  B l u e .  A  S m a l l  D a b  o f  Y e l l o w .
W h a t  d o  y o u  t h i n k  o f  t h i s  t o o l ?  D I S A  l a n g u a g e ?
I think it seems to be an effective way to avoid
misunderstandings. I understood immediately what it was all about,

[PAGE 226]
so I think the book could have been shorter—half as long, maybe. I
would have concentrated the text more. I don’t like repetition. But
sure, it’s a useful tool. Last Christmas I gave a copy to all my
coworkers as a gift and asked that they read it. And almost
everybody did.
W h a t  i s  t h e  m o s t  i m p o r t a n t  t a k e a w a y  f o r  y o u  f r o m  t h e  b o o k ?
That I no longer have to beat around the bush. Now my staff
know that I’m not an evil despot; I’m just Red. They unde rstand that
I’m not angry just determin ed. The most interesting thing was
reading about Blue behavior . I’d never reflected on why they saw
things so differently than I do. Now I understand that the process
itself is important for them, which is why they take such a long time.
A n y t h i n g  e l s e ?
No. Well, Yellows. I’ve always wondered about them. All that
babble. I have some acquaintances who are like that. They just sit
down and blow a lot of hot air in your face without really saying
anything much. My neighbor ’s like that. He plans all the time, but
none of his plans actually take off. It doesn’t bother me, but his wife
must be insane by now. And at my company , the Yellows get too little
done. But it’s not a major problem, in my opinion. I just stand firm
and demand that they deliver . I can live with their sour faces. I’m not
there to be soft and cuddly .
W h a t  i s  y o u r  e x p e r i e n c e  o f  G r e e n  b e h a v i o r ?
Sure.… Yes, well, what can I say? [Helena takes a long pause
and looks out the window .] They’re needed, too. Loyal and dutiful.
But in all honesty … I’d never realized that they talk behin d my back.
But it’s definitely true. They’re phenomenal at spreading rumors.
Even making the smallest change starts off a storm of gossip in the
lunchroom. Speculations about one thing after the other . Usually
completely incorrect and based on wrong information. It would be
easier if they just came straight to me with their questions. I mean,
how hard can it be to step into the manager ’s office and just ask?
They know that I’ll always answer honestly , so beating around the

[PAGE 227]
bush is frustra ting. I don’t know how many times I’ve said that we
have to just be honest with each other at this firm. Is that so hard?
W h y  d o  y o u  t h i n k  t h e y  d o n ’ t  s h a r e  w h a t  t h e y ’ r e  t h i n k i n g  w i t h  y o u ?
They’re afraid that I’ll get angry, of course. I’ve never thought
about it before. They think that I’m short-tempered, because, on
occasion, I raise my voice or glare at someone, but that just means
that I’m trying to highlight that what I’ve said is important. [Pause.]
Personally , I couldn’t care less if a conversation is a little tense; it’s
not the same thing as being angry. But it was news to me that some
people actively  avoid strong individuals. What I don’t understand is
how this happens between grown-ups.
Y o u  c o n s i d e r  i t  i m m a t u r e  b e h a v i o r — n o t  s a y i n g  w h a t  y o u  t h i n k ?
Immature. Dishonest, actually . A lot like a child who refuses to
admit that he took the chocolate chip cookie, even though  he wasn’t
allowed to. I know that he did it, so what’ s the point denying it?
That’ s something I really don’t understand. Just admit your mistakes!
Why is that so hard? Admit what you’ve done or not done , and then
we can move on. But denying it or avoiding it … it drives me insane.
O k a y .  L e t ’ s  c o n s i d e r  t h e  o t h e r  c o l o r s .  Y o u  s a i d  t h a t  y o u  f i n d  B l u e s  t h e
e a s i e s t  t o  d e a l  w i t h ?  R e l a t i v e l y  e a s y  w i t h  Y e l l o w s .  B u t  w h a t  a b o u t  o t h e r
R e d s ?  H o w  i s  i t  w o r k i n g  w i t h  p e o p l e  t h a t  h a v e  t h e  s a m e  p r o f i l e  y o u  h a v e ?
Usually , no problem. We do what we have to do. I have a
management team consisting  of five people besides myse lf. I would
say that three are Red. Or wait now. Two are Red and one
Red/Y ellow . One is Blue—the  controller . And the last one is … hard
to say. He’s both visionary and at the same time focuses on the
details. Can a person be Y ellow/Blue?
Y e s .  A  c o m m o n  c o m b i n a t i o n .  B u t  n o  G r e e n  i n  t h e  t e a m  t h e n ?
[Smiling.] No.
H o w  d o e s  y o u r  R e d  b e h a v i o r  f u n c t i o n ,  i n  g e n e r a l ,  d o  y o u  t h i n k ?
Well, before reading the book and discovering my personal profile
I never thought that much about it. I hadn’t really reflected on the

[PAGE 228]
way I approach things. But the more I read, the more I realized that I
was the cause of some of the problems I’ve had at work . The thing
about people hiding their real feelings was only one part of the story .
It never  occurr ed to me that some people were afraid or intimidated
by the way I behave. There’ s been a lot of turbulence when I made
decisions too quickly or when things weren’t properly thought out. Of
course, I know that I need to think through things before I decide on
anything, but it just happens. I get an idea—and off we go!
Implemented before lunch.
W h a t  a r e  t h e  c o n s e q u e n c e s  o f  t h e s e  p o o r l y  t h o u g h t - o u t  d e c i s i o n s ?  D o
y o u  h a v e  a n y  e x a m p l e s ?
Tons. [Laughter .] Once I accepted a job without even asking
about the salary . Turns out I had to work sixty hours a week without
a penny in overtime. On one occasion, I hired a person who turned
out to be totally useless. I hadn’t asked for any references and I
assumed that he knew what he was talking about. He knew nothing
about the industry or the product. He was a complete scammer .
Unfortunately , he cost us a lot before I finally managed to get rid of
him. Lots of money wasted, though.
T h a t  d o e s n ’ t  s o u n d  i d e a l .  H o w  a r e  t h i n g s  o u t s i d e  o f  w o r k ?  H o w  d o  y o u
m a n a g e  y o u r  p e r s o n a l  r e l a t i o n s h i p s ?
In those  areas I think even less. But it’s kind of funny . I showed
the book to my husband and asked him to read it. He didn’t, but I
highlighted some areas that I insisted he read.
R e d  b e h a v i o r ?
Red behavior . And he did read some of it. He probably
recognized his wife. He laughed a little, but now that I think about it,
he didn’t say anything in particular .
D i d  h e  m a k e  a n y  c o m m e n t s  a b o u t  G r e e n  b e h a v i o r ?
No.
H o w  d o  y o u  w o r k  t o g e t h e r ?  A s  a  t e a m ?

[PAGE 229]
How do we work together? [Loud laughter .] I tell him what needs
to be done, and he does it. Before he’s finished with it, I find
something else for him to do and send him off to do it. Later on, I get
annoyed because he hasn’t finished. But he’s never finished
anything in his entire life. We often laugh about this—I create
disorder but blame him. I’m sure he doesn’t have an easy life.
I  u n d e r s t a n d .  W h a t  w o u l d  y o u  s a y  y o u r  b i g g e s t  c h a l l e n g e s  a r e ,  b a s e d  o n
y o u r  R e d  b e h a v i o r ?
Some people take an eternity to make a simple decision, and it
drives me crazy . I know I’m fast, but some people are just painfully
slow. It doesn’t make a difference if it’s a friend or a coworker . For
instance, we said that we were going to buy an armchair for our
living room. Because I work so much, we agreed that my husband
would [here Helena raises her eyebrows, and slowly a smile spreads
across her face]. I agreed that he had to do all the research. Check
online, furniture stores, seco ndhand shops, and so on. But nothing
happened, of course! Two days later, when I asked him about it, he
hadn’t done anything at all! So, the following day during lunch, while
I was in the bathroom, I found five different options and sent them to
him. And when I got home five hours later, he still hadn’t done
anything! I exploded at him, and he locked himself in the basement.
O k a y ,  a  g o o d  e x a m p l e ,  t h a n k s .  H o w  l o n g  h a v e  y o u  b e e n  m a r r i e d ?
Fourteen years. We met by chance. I usually say that what
attracted me to him was that he could keep his mouth shut when
needed, and he still does. But sometimes I wish that he would take a
little more initiative and just do things. I’ve never actually asked him
what he saw in me.
B u t  h o w  d o  y o u  r e s o l v e  y o u r  c o n f l i c t s  i f  h e ’ s  G r e e n  a n d  y o u ’ r e  R e d ?
I don’t think we actually have that many conflicts. On the whole,
I’m the one who argues if anything happens, but, on the other hand,
he can get very sulky .
W h a t  d o  y o u  m e a n  b y  s u l k y ?

[PAGE 230]
He can walk around for days just moping. Normally , I just ignore
him; he usuall y recovers. But sometimes I get tired of all his sad
faces and asking him what the problem is. I confront him, as it were.
[Pause.]
W h a t  h a p p e n s  t h e n ?
What happens then? Well … He says that there’ s no problem.
That everythin g’s great. But that’s not true. He’s really easy to read,
so I always know if something is wrong. The problem is that he
refuses to admit that he’s grouchy . Which usually mean s that he’s
upset because of something I did. Or said. The problem is that I
never remember anything. I have to start guessing—which is
absolutely impossible. Often it’s about some insignificant stray
comment I made in passing, usually something I forgot the minute I
said it. And if I don’t guess correctly , then he gets even grumpier . It
can go on for weeks. I don’t understand how he copes with it.
B u t  h o w  d o  y o u  m o v e  o n ?  C a n ’ t  y o u  s o r t  i t  o u t ?
Well, we just tend to sweep  it under the rug. I forget about the
whole thing. But my husband stores the “conflict” in some private
archive that only he knows about. That shelf must be completely full
by now .
[Helena thinks for a moment. You know , I’ve always gotten in
trouble for sharing my opinion, for walking my own path.  I’ve never
really fit in. Even as a child, I did stupid things and took risks. But
now I’m glad that I took risks because it’s taken me somewhere. But
it definitely hasn’t always been easy .
H o w  h a s  y o u r  r i s k - t a k i n g  b e n e f i t e d  y o u ?
Sitting and thinking about things leads nowhere. It makes no
difference how great your plans are if you don’t get off your butt and
carry them out. I didn’t always know where I was going, but that
never stopped me. I’ve had some tough spots, went bankrupt, lost
my job, and things like that. Not that much fun, but those things
brought me to where I am now. The way I see it, it’s not how much

[PAGE 231]
you know or how clever you are, but what you actually do. And I
have always been good at that. Doing things.
W h a t  a d v i c e  w o u l d  y o u  g i v e  t o  p e o p l e  w h o  m e e t  y o u ?  W h a t  s h o u l d  t h e y
k e e p  i n  m i n d ?
[Pause.] Don’t  be intimidated by the fact that sometimes I’m a
little too pushy . Don’t back off just because I can raise my voice a bit.
I’m not angry just because I push people. But also that they have to
get the show on the road. My husband and I often talk about how
different we are at deliver ing a message. While he gives the
background for ten minutes and then comes to the point, I go straight
to the point and tell people what’ s important. Maybe I throw in a little
background info, but probabl y not. People should keep in mind that
you can work without talking  all the time. Put your energy into the
task at hand instead of a bunch of other things. You can socialize on
the weekend.
H å k a n  S e l l e r  o f  A d v e r t i s i n g  S p a c e  o n  O n e  o f  t h e  M a j o r  C o m m e r c i a l  T V
C h a n n e l s .  M o s t l y  Y e l l o w  b u t  w i t h  S o m e  S p l a s h e s  o f  G r e e n .  N o  B l u e  o r  R e d .
W h a t  d o  y o u  t h i n k  o f  t h i s  t o o l ?  D I S A  l a n g u a g e ?
Really great! An incredibly useful tool that more people should
know about. I recognized so much of myself in the book, too. It was
brilliant. I showed the book to everyone I know , and we just had to
laugh about how accurate it was. I’ve read most of the book, mostly
about Yellows. I don’t agree with everything, but most of it was spot-
on.
W h a t  p a r t s  o f  Y e l l o w  b e h a v i o r  d i d  y o u  t h i n k  w e r e  m o s t  a c c u r a t e ?
That we Yellows are very creative and resourceful. People are
always telling me that. Also, I’m adept at solving complex problems,
because I can see solutions in a dif ferent way than everyone else.
W h a t  d o  y o u  m e a n  b y  d i f f e r e n t ?
Einstein once said that you can’t solve a problem with the same
mind-set as when you create d it. Or something like that. I think that’s
exactly right. That’ s why I always approach any problem with new,

[PAGE 232]
fresh eyes. My customers always appreciate my creative thinking.
And I’m really good at winning people over. I’ve always found it easy
to charm people; it is a kind of natural talent actually . I know lots of
people; I always have. And I’m great at public speaking. In school, I
was president of the student council and often spoke to the entire
school.
T h e  e n t i r e  s c h o o l ?
Yes, to all the students. Or not to all, not really . Okay , usually to
my grade. All the freshmen. But there was always a great
atmosphere, and people liked it. Since then, I just love talking in front
of people. I’m often asked to be the spokesman in dif ferent contexts.
C a n  y o u  g i v e  m e  s o m e  e x a m p l e s ?
Oh yes. When there are projects at work, for example. I’m always
the one to report back to our bosses. I give a great presentation at
client meetings, too. If there are several of us from the firm, I do the
talking.
W h a t  d o  t h e  o t h e r s  t h i n k  a b o u t  t h a t ?
No problem. They like avoid ing it. Lots of people have difficulty
talking in front of people, as you probably know . Were you a
psychologist? I know a girl who’s a psychologist. She works at a
prison; seems very interestin g. She says most of the prisoners are
pretty miserabl e, which isn’t hard to believe. I wouldn’t make it being
locked away like that.
I ’ m  n o t  a c t u a l l y  a  p s y c h o l o g i s t .  I ’ m  a  b e h a v i o r a l  s p e c i a l i s t .
There was one thing in the book that I didn’t understand—areas
for improvement.
W h a t  d i d  y o u  t h i n k  t h a t  m e a n t ?
The book talked about how Yellows are quick to make decisions,
and that’s true. But I disagre e with the idea that my decisions aren’t
well thought out. I’m very analytically inclined. I always do thorough
research. I gather all the facts  before I decide on anything. So in that
regard the report book was of f base.

[PAGE 233]
I  u n d e r s t a n d .  A r e  t h e r e  a n y  o t h e r  d i s c r e p a n c i e s ?
That I use too many words when I criticize. That’ s completely
wrong. I’m very concise and articulate, so I don’t think that was
accurate. Also the bit about following instincts and going with your
gut—that’ s actually a good thing, not a weakness.
T o  g o  m o r e  o n  f e e l i n g  t h a n  o n  f a c t s ?
Exactly . Huma ns are emotional beings. So we should use our
feelings. Especially me. I’m very intuitive, so it’s something I’m really
good at. Not everyone has good instincts, so that’ s a real asset.
T h a t  m a y  b e  t r u e .  D o  y o u  t h i n k  p e o p l e  c a n  d e v e l o p  t h e i r  i n s t i n c t s  o v e r
t i m e ?
No. It’s someth ing you’re born with. You either have it, like me, or
you don’t.
T h e n  i t  i s  t o o  l a t e  t o  d o  a n y t h i n g  a b o u t  i t ?
No, it’ s not too late. That’ s was not what I meant.
B u t  y o u  s a i d  i f  p e o p l e  d i d n ’ t  h a v e  a  g u t  f e e l i n g  t h e y  c o u l d n ’ t  d e v e l o p  t h a t
s k i l l ?
Okay , maybe I was exaggerating. But it’ s definitely important!
D o  y o u  e v e r  n e e d  t o  k e e p  e m o t i o n s  i n  c h e c k  a n d  u s e  l o g i c  i n s t e a d ?
Oh yes, absolutely . It’s very important to think logically and
rationally . I always say that. You have to look at what works and go
from there. I think that it’ s easier for someone like me, who has some
experience. I have been a salesperson for many years, so I know
what to take into account.
I ’ m  s o r r y ,  b u t  I  a m  a  l i t t l e  c o n f u s e d .  J u s t  n o w  y o u  t o l d  m e  t h a t  i t  w a s  o n l y
g u t  f e e l i n g  t h a t  w a s  i m p o r t a n t .  H o w  d o  y o u  r e c o n c i l e  t h o s e  t w o  t h i n g s ?
You’re twisting my words. I never said that you shouldn’t use
logic. [At this point, Håkan crosses his hands over his chest and
compresses his lips.] What I’m saying is that you should go on gut
feeling. [Pause.] And facts.
L e t ’ s  m o v e  o n .  W h a t  w a s  t h e  m o s t  p r a c t i c a l  t h i n g  y o u  l e a r n e d  a f t e r
r e a d i n g  t h e  b o o k ?

[PAGE 234]
That Blues are boring. Though I already knew that beforehand. I
just didn’t know that they were Blue. But those red-tape jackasses,
well … I remember once I was working on this project. Nothing too
complicated, and we’d already done the same thing before. A special
way to sell a new product line. We had a couple of Blue guys on the
team. They were smart, well informed, and everything, but they
never got started on the job. They planned and wrote lists and made
calculations and messed around with details. But they didn’t actually
do anything!
M a y b e  t h e y  w e r e n ’ t  a s  g o o d  a t  u s i n g  t h e i r  g u t  f e e l i n g ?
What do you mean?
S o  y o u  f i n d  i t  h a r d  t o  w o r k  w i t h  B l u e s ?
They can’t keep up with me, that’ s all.
H a s  w h a t  y o u  l e a r n e d  i n  t h e  b o o k  a f f e c t e d  y o u r  p e r s o n a l  l i f e  i n  a n y  w a y ?
No. I’m the same as I always. I’ve got lots of friends. The parties
we organize at home are legendary . The neighbors talk about them
for months afterwards.
S o  y o u  i n v i t e  t h e  n e i g h b o r s ,  t o o ?  T h a t  s o u n d s  v e r y  n i c e .
Oh, no way! They’re boring as hell.
B u t  w h a t  d o  t h e  n e i g h b o r s  t a l k  a b o u t  t h e n ?  I f  t h e y  d i d n ’ t  e v e n  c o m e  t o
t h e  p a r t y ?
[Pause.] W ell, man, who knows? Ha-ha!
W h a t  a d v i c e  w o u l d  y o u  g i v e  t h e  p e o p l e  w h o  m e e t  y o u ?  W h a t  s h o u l d  t h e y
c o n s i d e r ?
Who meet me?
Y e s .  H o w  w o u l d  y o u  l i k e  t h o s e  a r o u n d  y o u  t o  r e a c t ?
Let me tell you. Don’t take life so seriously . I mean, we live only
once. People should remember that. We should all let ourselves
have fun at the same time. And don’t caught up in little things all the
time. Move on. Don’t get hung up on things. I don’t. Life’s just a
joyride.

[PAGE 235]
O k a y ,  t h a t ’ s  w h a t  y o u  b e l i e v e .  B u t  w h a t  a d v i c e  w o u l d  y o u  g i v e  t o  t h o s e
w h o  m e e t  y o u ?  H o w  w o u l d  y o u  l i k e  t o  b e  t r e a t e d ?
With a smile. Y ou can get very far with a smile.
A n d  w h e n  i t  c o m e s  t o  w o r k ?  H o w  w o u l d  y o u  l i k e  t o  b e  t r e a t e d  t h e r e ?
Same thing I just said. With a smile. The rest will always work out.
[ P a u s e . ]  O k a y .  T h e r e  a r e n ’ t  a n y  p e r f e c t  p e o p l e .  W e  a l l  h a v e  o u r  f a u l t s  a n d
s h o r t c o m i n g s ,  s o  w h a t  w o u l d  y o u  s a y  y o u r  w e a k n e s s e s  a r e ,  d o  y o u  t h i n k ?
I don’t usually think in that way. My focus has always been on
positive things.  I like to emphasize the good things in life. If everyone
went around thinking about what doesn’t work, then nothing would
get done, right?
T h a t ’ s  l o g i c a l ,  b u t  e v e r y  b e h a v i o r  p r o f i l e  h a s  w e a k n e s s e s .  T h e y  d o n ’ t  j u s t
g o  a w a y  b e c a u s e  w e  a v o i d  t a l k i n g  a b o u t  t h e m .
That’ s not what I mean. What I meant is that you shouldn’t focus
on nega tive things. It’s better to emphasize the positive. God knows
there’ s enough  depressing stuff in the world already , right? Take, for
instance, Green behavior . They worry about everything. They see
danger absolu tely everywher e. I mean, you can’t go around being
anxious all the time. It doesn’ t work like that. I have a neighbor who’s
afraid of everything. Especially new things, which are the things that
I’m good at. Sometimes I think he’s even scared of his own shadow .
Or think about Blue behavio r. Risk-phobic! Everything is a risk for
them. Even if you know the result you’ll get, they’re still focused on
the risks. That’ s totally incomprehensible to me.
Y o u ’ r e  a b s o l u t e l y  r i g h t !  G r e e n s  a r e n ’ t  i n c l i n e d  t o  c h a n g e  t h i n g s ,  B l u e s  g e t
s t u c k  a n a l y z i n g  r i s k s .  D o  y o u  s e e  a n y  w e a k n e s s e s  i n  R e d  b e h a v i o r ?
Cantankerous. That’ s what I think about Reds. Lots of them are
actually quite nasty . Sure, they’re result oriented and whatnot, but
there’ s no need to be rude to get things done. Some of them can be
so short. You know , you send them a nice long text messag e, and
the reply you get is just: “Okay .” It takes five seconds to write a
longer message, it doesn’t cost anything, and it’s so much more
personable! I’m always very careful about how I express myself.

[PAGE 236]
S o  y o u ’ v e  a n a l y z e d  t h e  w e a k n e s s e s  i n  R e d s ,  G r e e n s ,  a n d  B l u e s .  D o  y o u
t h i n k  t h a t  t h e r e  a r e  a n y  a r e a s  f o r  d e v e l o p m e n t  f o r  Y e l l o w  b e h a v i o r ?
Yeaaah … it all depends on self-awareness. Without self-
awareness, things can get a little crazy . [Pause.]
A r e  y o u  t h i n k i n g  o f  a n y t h i n g  i n  p a r t i c u l a r ?
The part about being a bad listener . That’ s important, ’cause if
you’re not aware of it, then the conversation can go south. Though
sometimes you just can’t sit around and listen. A lot of times I’m
forced to take command in meetings and run the show or else
nothing will happen. But I can keep things moving along, so it works
out very well.
O k a y ,  s o  s o m e  Y e l l o w s  c a n  l e a r n  t o  l i s t e n  b e t t e r .  W h a t  d o  t h i n g s  l o o k  l i k e
f o r  y o u ?  D o  y o u  t h i n k  y o u  h a v e  a n y  w e a k n e s s e s  y o u  c o u l d  b e  w o r k i n g  o n ?
[A very long pause sets in.]
Nothing that comes to mind.
E l i s a b e t h  E m p l o y e e  a t  a  P u b l i c  H e a l t h - C a r e  O r g a n i z a t i o n  A  G r e e n  w i t h  s o m e
E l e m e n t s  o f  B l u e .  S h e  H a s  a  H i n t  o f  Y e l l o w  b u t  N o  R e d  a t  A l l .
W h a t  d o  y o u  t h i n k  o f  t h i s  t o o l ?  D I S A  l a n g u a g e ?
It was fun to read the book! I felt like I already knew a lot about
my behavior , but I think this has made it even clearer . Now I know
that Reds think I’m stubborn, and that I’m a bit cautious by nature.
But I want everyone to be in agreement. Cooperation is important to
me, and I think everyone should feel like that.
W h a t  d i d  y o u  t a k e  a w a y  f r o m  t h e  b o o k ?
My son gave me the book as a birthday present. He’s so kind, he
always gives me something, even though I said I don’t  want any
presents. He’s unemployed and has some money troubles, but Filip
is caring. It took me a while to get started reading the book. It was
actually a little hard for me to get into it, mostly because I was
interrupted all the time. But once I got going, I enjoyed it! There are
such funny examples. I read the sections about my husband’ s colors
aloud to him, and we laughed a lot.

[PAGE 237]
W h a t  c o l o r s  d o  y o u  t h i n k  h e  h a s ?
Oh, he’s Yellow . And Blue. At the same time, actually . Can
someone be like that?
Y e s .  I t ’ s  a b s o l u t e l y  p o s s i b l e .  W h a t  d i d  y o u  t h i n k  w a s  f u n n y ?
The parts about him being optimistic about time. He always
believes that he’ll get way more done than he actually does. And
then we hit traffic the second we get in the car. Or he hops into the
shower three minutes before  guests start arriving. Things like that.
But that optimism is part of the reason I fell for him thirty years ago.
He’s a good guy , my T ommy .
W h a t  w i l l  y o u  t a k e  w i t h  y o u  i n  t h e  f o r m  o f  p r a c t i c a l  k n o w l e d g e ?
That I get on well with other Greens, which is good, because
there are so many of us! I liked the part about how Greens take care
of each  other all the time. That’s important. You’ve got to do that. But
nowadays it feels as if everyo ne is becoming more and more selfish,
but I don’t think it will stay like that in the long run. I also read a lot
about the Yellows, like my husband, and about Blues, like my sister .
She is very straitlaced. V ery rigid and a little bit uninterested.
U n i n t e r e s t e d  i n  w h a t ?
In the rest of the world, really . She never asks how things are
going, and hardly calls you on your birthday .
H a r d l y  c a l l s ?  D o e s  t h a t  m e a n  s h e  d o e s n ’ t  c a l l  y o u  o n  y o u r  b i r t h d a y ?
Well, she does . But it feels like she’s doing it out of obligation
rather than out of genuine interest. And she can be really critical as
well. Tommy redid our back deck a few years ago. Then Eivor came
—she is my sister—and the first thing she did was start criticizing his
work.
W h a t  d i d  s h e  s a y ?
The first words out of her mouth were to point out that the deck
railing was two degrees of f from being level.
W a s  i t ?

[PAGE 238]
Well, it was a tiny bit crooked. But why did she have to point that
out? He’d been  working on the deck for several weeks, and instead
of complimenting his hard work, she just started criticizing
everything.
S o  i t  w a s n ’ t  j u s t  t h e  r a i l i n g  t h a t  s h e  c r i t i c i z e d ?
[Elisabeth shakes her head.]
W h a t  d o  y o u  t h i n k  a b o u t  R e d s ?
Yes … they’re okay , in their own way . [Pause.]
W h a t  d o  y o u  m e a n ?
They’re very efficient. They get a lot done and they’re quick.
Sometimes I wish I had a little more of that ambition in me, but I
don’t. I’m just me.
B u t  y o u  t h i n k  i t  m i g h t  b e  h e l p f u l  t o  b e  a  l i t t l e  R e d — s o m e t i m e s ?
Yes, sure. But you are who you are. And they can be a bit …
tough.
H o w  a r e  t h e y  t o u g h ?
Well, a little bit insensitive in certain situations. Our department
head is probably a Red. He’ll say just about anything. And the
surgeons are terrible to deal with. They boss people around however
they want.
H o w  d o e s  t h a t  a f f e c t  y o u ?
It’s hard for me to deal with conflict. You can’t avoid it completely ,
I know that, but it’s difficult when everyone is butting heads all the
time.
S o  e v e r y o n e  i s  a t  l o g g e r h e a d s  a l l  t h e  t i m e ?
Not really everyone. And not all the time of course. But we
definitely have  communicatio n problems. There’ s a bad atmosphere,
and the manag ement doesn’ t listen. A lot of us are suffering in that
work environment. I was on sick leave last year .
H a v e  y o u  t a k e n  t h i s  u p  w i t h  y o u r  b o s s ?

[PAGE 239]
We tried to, five years ago. It didn’t help much. It got better for a
while, but then things just went back to normal.
O k a y .  S o  h o w  a r e  y o u  f e e l i n g  n o w ?
It’s all right. We have a great team of people at work, and that’s
important. W e stick together . Many of us have been working there for
a long time and we wouldn’t want to leave.
W h a t  d o  y o u  t h i n k  a b o u t  y o u r  o w n  c o l o r ?  A s  a  G r e e n  h o w  d o  y o u  g e t  o n
w i t h  t h e  o t h e r  c o l o r s ?
Well, the Reds are tricky of course. They don’t like Greens,
though there are a lot more of us. They complain about us; I’ve
heard this personally . They say things; they call us names
unnecessarily .
W h a t  d o  y o u  m e a n  b y  t h a t ?  C a n  y o u  g i v e  a  s p e c i f i c  e x a m p l e ?
I don’t have a specific example, but it’s something you just know .
You feel it when you’re dissatisfied. It kind of hangs in the air .
Y o u  s a i d  t h a t  y o u r  b o s s  w a s  R e d ?
Not my immediate boss, but the head of the depa rtment.
Emphatically Red.
A n d  h o w  d o  y o u  k n o w  t h a t ?
Well, he is. It’s clear as day. He walks quickly , talks quickly . Very
demanding. Goal oriented. Dif ficult. He’ s made cuts.
I f  y o u  i m p l e m e n t  c u t s ,  y o u ’ r e  t o u g h ?
Definitely .
S o  h o w  a r e  t h i n g s  g o i n g  w i t h  t h e  h e a d  o f  t h e  d e p a r t m e n t  t h e n ?
I don’t know . I’ve never spoken to him directly . But you just know .
Y o u  j u s t  k n o w ?
We’ve heard about other employees who got into hot water with
him.
W h a t  h a p p e n e d  t h e n ?

[PAGE 240]
One of them has been harshly reprimanded for little things like
arriving late. She was called into the office immediately . But not me.
I’m always on time.
S o  s o m e o n e  d i d n ’ t  c o m e  o n  t i m e  f o r  w o r k  a n d  w a s  c r i t i c i z e d  f o r  t h a t ?
She got a telling-of f.
W h a t  w a s  s a i d ?
I wasn’t  there, of course, and didn’t hear it, but she told me that it
shouldn’t have been handled like that.
D o  y o u  t h i n k  i t ’ s  o k a y  t o  b e  l a t e  f o r  w o r k ?
No, it’ s not okay .
B u t  i s n ’ t  i t  t h e  h e a d  o f  t h e  d e p a r t m e n t ’ s  r e s p o n s i b i l i t y  t o  c o r r e c t  b e h a v i o r
l i k e  t h a t ?
I guess so, but it depends on how you do it.
D i d  h e  s c r e a m  a n d  s h o u t ?
No, but he said that no one was allowed to be late, and if she
came in late again, she would get a warning.
H o w  m a n y  t i m e s  h a d  s h e  c o m e  l a t e ?
Oh, she’ s never on time.
O k a y .  W h a t  w o u l d  y o u  l i k e  o t h e r  p e o p l e  t o  k n o w  a b o u t  y o u  w h e n  t h e y
m e e t  y o u  i n  r e a l  l i f e ?  H o w  w o u l d  y o u  l i k e  t o  b e  t r e a t e d ?
Well, it would be great if people understood that some of us want
to take it easy. And that I don’t enjoy things changing all the time. I’d
like to get a chance to get to know people a little bit before we just
dive into work. Let’s grab a coffee, chat for a while. It’s nice to know
people as people, and then we can get back to business.
A n y t h i n g  e l s e ?
Yes, we Greens aren’t great at dealing with conflicts. We need to
learn to handle that better .
S t e f a n  E c o n o m i s t  W o r k i n g  a t  t h e  H e a d q u a r t e r s  o f  a  V e r y  L a r g e  C o m p a n y ,
w i t h  O f f i c e s  i n  S e v e r a l  E u r o p e a n  C o u n t r i e s .  B l u e  w i t h  S o m e  H i n t s  o f  R e d .  N o
Y e l l o w  o r  G r e e n .

[PAGE 241]
W h a t  d o  y o u  t h i n k  o f  t h i s  t o o l ?  D I S A  l a n g u a g e ?
It’s quite an interesting conce pt. It seems like there’ s been  a lot of
research done on the topic, which I find exciting. I’ve seen a variation
of this tool before, but that system categorized people by assigning
different letter combinations. It would be interesting to compare the
two models.
T h e r e  a r e  s e v e r a l  d i f f e r e n t  t o o l s  a v a i l a b l e .  M o s t  o f  t h e m  a r e  g r o u n d e d  i n
t h e  s a m e  b a s i c  r e s e a r c h ,  b u t  a s  t i m e  w e n t  o n  t h e y  d e v e l o p e d  d i f f e r e n t l y .  T h e
t o o l  I  u s e  i s  p a r t i c u l a r l y  a c c u r a t e .
Do you mean with regard to reliability or validity?
B o t h .  I ’ d  a l s o  r e c o m m e n d  M a r s t o n ’ s  b o o k E m o t i o n s  o f  N o r m a l  P e o p l e i f
y o u ’ r e  c u r i o u s  t o  l e a r n  m o r e .  W h a t  c o n c l u s i o n s  h a v e  y o u  d r a w n  a f t e r
r e a d i n g  t h e  b o o k ?
It was interesting to see how the author structured it. He wrote
about Reds first, then about Yellows, Greens, and Blues.  Each new
topic was explained in reference to the four dif ferent colors. That was
good because it means you don’t get bored reading about any one
specific color . And I noticed that there was always just about the
same number of pages on each color , which is pretty impressive. I
wonder how he managed it?
R e g a r d i n g  p a t t e r n s  o f  b e h a v i o r ,  w h a t  h a v e  y o u  l e a r n e d  s o  f a r ?
That people are different. I knew that already , of course , but it
was interesting  to see exact ly how we differ. And there were good
examples in the book. For instance, I was particularly interested in
Red behavior .
W h a t  a r e  y o u r  t h o u g h t s  o n  t h a t ?
Their tremendous drive to move forward. I have a colleague with
exactly that kind of attitude and drive. Always moving forward,
always first in line. His ability to make decisions quickly is very
impressive. He ends up making a lot of mistakes, of course, but he
corrects them quickly , so I don’t think it’ s a huge problem.
D o  y o u  w o r k  w e l l  w i t h  R e d s ?

[PAGE 242]
Pretty well, I think. Sure, they’re often careless, as I said, but you
can help them be more exact ing. My role is usually to make sure we
stick to the plan, and that’s not something Reds are great at. But
they’re often quite good at improvising, which is a valuabl e skill. And
they’re brave.
I t  s o u n d s  a s  i f  y o u  d o n ’ t  h a v e  a n y  m a j o r  p r o b l e m s  w i t h  R e d  b e h a v i o r ?
No. It depends  on what you mean by major , but I’d say I don’t
have any big problems with them. But, having said that, I think they
have considerably more dif ficulty dealing with people like me.
W h a t  d o  y o u  m e a n ?
I want everything well structured. Zero mistakes. In this business,
we work with finances and there’s no margin for error. This industry
demands a rather meticulous  type of person. If I’ve understood the
book correctly , Reds aren’t interested in details, which is basically
what my work amounts to. There would be enormous consequences
if I were to be careless with decimal places. It just can’t happen.
O k a y .  H o w  a b o u t  t h e  o t h e r  c o l o r s ?  H o w  d o  y o u  g e t  a l o n g  w i t h  G r e e n s ?
Fairly well. Both of us—at least according to the book—are
introverts, which I think is a positive. Then you can devote yourself to
work rather than just lolling around chatting. [Pause.]
B u t  G r e e n s  l i k e  c h a t t i n g .
That’ s true, they do. I don’t, though. Unless it’ s work related. Then
we can talk for a long time. What I don’t like about Greens is that
they have a tendency to make a pretense of working. They are often
away from their desks, doing  something else instead of working, and
that slows everything down. It’ s a problem.
D o  y o u  f i n d  t h i s  i s  a  c o m m o n  p r o b l e m  i n  y o u r  w o r k p l a c e ?
Yes.
W h a t  h a v e  y o u  d o n e  t o  t a c k l e  t h e  p r o b l e m ?
Nothing.
W h y  n o t ?

[PAGE 243]
It’s not my responsibility . It’s a management issue.
H a v e  y o u  r a i s e d  t h e  i s s u e  w i t h  t h e  m a n a g e m e n t  t e a m ?
No.
S o  s o m e  o f  y o u r  c o w o r k e r s  p r e t e n d  t o  w o r k ,  a n d  t h i s  s l o w s  t h e  w h o l e
t e a m  d o w n .  Y o u ’ v e  o b s e r v e d  t h i s  b u t  h a v e n ’ t  d o n e  a n y t h i n g  a b o u t  i t ?
That’ s right.
B u t  w h y  n o t ?
Like I said before, it’s a management problem. I don’t have any
authority to act on the issue.
W h a t  w o u l d  y o u  d o  i f  y o u  h a d  t h e  a u t h o r i t y ?
That’ s a hypothetical question.
Y e s ,  b u t  l e t ’ s  j u s t  s a y  y o u  d i d .
But that’s not the actual situation. I’m not interested in
management, so I don’t know what I would do.
J u s t  o u t  o f  c u r i o s i t y — i f  y o u r  b o s s  a s k e d  y o u  f o r  a d v i c e  o n  e x a c t l y  t h i s
i s s u e ,  a n  e m p l o y e e  w h o  d o e s n ’ t  d o  w h a t  t h e y  s h o u l d ,  w h a t  a d v i c e  w o u l d
y o u  g i v e ?
Purely hypothetically?
Y e s .
I’d ask the boss to follow up with the problem employee more
frequently . Give them feedback on what’ s not working, and demand
that they change the problematic behavior .
O k a y .  C a n  w e  t a l k  a  l i t t l e  b i t  a b o u t  Y e l l o w  b e h a v i o r ?
[At this point, Stefan crosses his hands on his chest and nods.]
H o w  d o  y o u  p e r c e i v e  p e o p l e  w i t h  d i s t i n c t i v e  Y e l l o w  b e h a v i o r ?
They’re a bit annoying. I just wish that they’d take things much
more seriously . Work, to start with. Of course, I realize that you also
need to have fun at work, but not for the majority of the day. You
can’t fool aroun d all the time during working hours. The worst thing is
that they just wander around making a noise, bothering everyone. At

[PAGE 244]
times they can be very entertaining, but working is working and
playing is playing. There’ s also the issue of their total inability to get
the facts right. I think they’re very incompetent when it comes to
factual issues. They don’t take anything seriously , and that leads to
lots of mistakes. For instance, if a pure Yellow individual worked as a
controller how would that work out? He wouldn’t even know what to
look for. But the really seriou s issue is that they say so many things
that aren’t true. For examp le, they might say that they double-
checked certain details without ever actually doing it. Or insist that
they’re not careless despite the fact that everyone can see that they
most definitely are. The whole thing is wildly frustrating.
H a v e  y o u  e v e r  r e a l l y  g o t t e n  t o  k n o w  a  Y e l l o w ?
How can you avoid it? They pour out their life story to whoever
they like, with a total lack of discernment. They think that all of us are
interested in their summer house, or their puppies, or their kid’s new
tooth, or their brother ’s new fishing boat. But all of that is completely
and totally irrelevant.
D o  y o u  e v e r  h a n g  o u t  w i t h  Y e l l o w s ?
No. I tend to avoid them.
W h y ?
I wouldn’t be able to stand all that talking. They’d talk me to
death. I can’t listen to them yammering on and on about everything
and nothing. And you never know if what they’re saying  is actually
true. That irritates me. They hyperbolize all the time; five minutes
with a Yellow and I’m at my wit’s end. My brother-in-law always talks
about his new position at work. But he describes it differently every
time. I’ve asked him what his title is, because I didn’t understand
what he actua lly does, but he always gets very vague. One time I
asked how the company was growing and I got a long harangue
about how they were just about to take out a world patent on
something. But he wouldn’t tell me how that was going to happen
and what the details of the project were. It was hopeless.

[PAGE 245]
M a y b e  h e  d i d n ’ t  k n o w  t h e  a n s w e r ?
Then he should have said so! “I don’t know .” I mean how hard
can that be? Instead, he exploded with a hundred million things I
wasn’t interested in.
W h a t  a d v i c e  w o u l d  y o u  g i v e  t o  o t h e r s  t o  h e l p  t h e m  i n t e r a c t  b e t t e r  w i t h
y o u ?
Good question. I’d advise them to please respect my desire to be
professional and not devote valuable time to things that aren’t work
related. They should be well prepared when they come to me with
questions. I need lots of background information to be able to give a
proper answer .
W h a t  a r e  y o u r  g r e a t e s t  w e a k n e s s e s ?
Let me think. Sometimes I get way too caught up in details. I
know that. I don’t think that it’s an issue at work, but in my private life
it can be a problem.
H o w  s o ?
My wife is rather Red. She thinks that I’m slow at everything, and
she’s right. I tend to be suspicious of new ideas. Not that I can’t
change, but I often see problems where none actually exist.
Sometimes I find it difficult to make decisions and I get anxious. We
really need a new television at home, because the current one is on
the fritz. But there are so many different models, and I haven’t had
the time to do proper researc h. My wife thinks we just need to take
ten minutes and go buy a new one. But what if it isn’t good? How do
I know if it’s the type we need? After all, it’s a big investment. So
we’ve just been making do with the old one.
A n y  l a s t  t h o u g h t s ?
It’s an interes ting concept, as I said. I’m going to order the
Marston book.

[PAGE 246]
2 0
A Quick Little Quiz to See What You’ve
Learned
Here’ s a chance for you to test your skills! This is a fun thing that you
can use to test out your acquaintances. How much do you really
know about how people work? I hope the answers you get will lead
to interesting discussions, either around the water cooler or at the
dinner table at home.
  1. Which combination of profiles would naturally agree on a social
level?
Two Y ellows
Two Reds
Yellow and Red
Blue and Green
All of the above
  2. Which combination of profiles naturally work well together?
Green with anyone else
Two Y ellows
Two Reds
Blue and Red
All of the above
  3. Which profile will always prefer to be the head of a project?
Red

[PAGE 247]
Yellow
Green
Blue
  4. Which profile would make the best surgeon?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
  5. Which person would enjoy giving a speech the most?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
  6. Which person would know exactly where he saved that email
from his boss?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
  7. Which person would want to do more tests or get more
information before making a decision?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
  8. Which person can you always rely on to arrive on time?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue

[PAGE 248]
9. Which person doesn’t follow the rulebook to get a job done?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
10. Which person would be the most willing to try something new to
get the job done?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
11. Which person will remember personal criticism the longest?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
12. Which person is the least organized but knows exactly where to
go to get what he needs?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
13. Which profile always wants to make decisions?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
14. Which profile wears the latest fashions?
Red
Yellow
Green

[PAGE 249]
Blue
15. Which profile would enjoy new challenges the most?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
16. Which profile would be the quickest to judge other people?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
17. Which combination of profiles would form the best team?
Two Greens
Two Reds
Yellow and Red
Blue and Green
A mixture of all the colors
18. Which profile will probably talk the most?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
19. Which profile would assimilate new ideas the quickest?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
20. Which profile would delegate a task but then still do it himself?
Red
Yellow

[PAGE 250]
Green
Blue
21. Which profile is the best listener?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
22. Which profile wouldn’t miss the last step of the instructions?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
23. Which profile is most common in your social circle?
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
The answers can be found on page 269.
More About Question 23
At work, you can’t always choose the people you’ll work with.
They’re just there, whether you would have chosen them or not. In
the professional world, you have to play a good game with the cards
that you have. But outside of work, when you can choose who you
will spend your time with, what kind of people do you choose? Have
you chosen people who are similar to yourself, or do you hang out
with people who are your total opposite?
Of course, there are no right or wrong answers, but it’s interesting
to think about it. When we can choose, whom do we choose?
And how do we choose the partner we want to spend the rest of
our lives with? Your mirror image, or your opposite? A fascinating

[PAGE 251]
question, right?

[PAGE 252]
2 1
A Final Example from Everyday Life
Perhaps the Most Enlightening T eam Project in the History of the
World
Okay , my friend—it’ s time to summarize all of this. To do that, I’d like
to tell you about a fascinating experience I had a few years ago.
I was leading a conference, and I got it into my head to do an
experiment with a group of managers who were working at a telecom
company . The participants were professional and clever , and all of
them were successful in their respective fields. They had excellent
qualifications and were destined for brilliant careers. I’d already
made profiles for all of them— they had completed a self-assessment
that showed which communication style they had.
I divided  the managers into groups with similar behavior profiles. I
imagined that it would be easy for them to get along. They ’d certainly
understand one another . There were twenty people in total. I called
the groups Red, Yellow , Gree n, and Blue. I mean I had to call them
something.
They had to solve a speci ally constructed problem that was
connected to their field and required cooperation. They were given
an hour to complete it. I explained the challenge and all the groups
eagerly accepted the instructions and got to work.
After the groups had been working for a while, I went around and
checked out what was going on in the various teams.
In the Red Group, the noise  level was high. Three peop le were
standing and loudly explaini ng why they were right. Two of them

[PAGE 253]
were in the middle of an argument, while the final person had
decided to work alone. Completely unconcerned about the shouting
match three feet away , he was writing so fast that his pen was
starting to spark.
When I asked if everything was okay in there, everything
suddenly stopped and all of them looked at me in surprise.
“Is everything okay?” I repeated anxiously .
“Peachy!” one of the belligerent guys said grimly . “We’re almost
done here.”
I left them and continued on. The Yellow Group was also working
frantically . You could almost taste the energy in the room. Things
were happening! The discuss ions were lively , with everyone trying to
convince the others of their own position. While the Reds were mad
as hell with one another , there was nothing but smiles here. Three of
the Yellows were jockeying for space at the whiteboard, and another
told me an amusing anecdote  that had nothing to do with the subject
at hand (but it was actually hilarious). The fifth manager in the Yellow
Group was doodling on a piece of paper and sending emails on his
cell phone.
I left them to pay a visit to the Green Group. Inside the room,
there was a strange calmness. Their voices were quiet, and they
were all listening rather than speaking. The chief goal was stability
and security . Five of the managers were sitting quietly , listening to
one of their colleagues telling a sad story about his dog who had
tragically died of old age that same winter . He was still missing his
life companion.
The last manager had sketched out some suggestions about how
they could solve the task I’d given them, but every sugges tion ended
with a question  mark. She needed more input, and it looked like she
would have to ask for it. She was in trouble.
I contin ued on. In the last group, the Blue Group, the room was
almost absurdly quiet. After sitting with them for three minutes
without anyone  uttering so much as a single word, I was seriously

[PAGE 254]
concerned. A lot of thought was happening under the surface, but
there was no real communication taking place.
A woman was reading silently through the task with her lips
moving. I asked if they needed help to get started. I got a few
hesitant nods in reply . They soon began a very thorough
deliberation. They would absolutely get to the bottom of things. It
was obvious that they were on the right track, but on an extremely
detailed level. They discuss ed for a long time what their plan of
action should be.
I remember glancing furtively at the clock. Half the allotted time
had passed, but they hadn’t produced anything concrete. Proposals
had been put forward, but they’d been rejected by the others on a
variety of technicalities. Every word was chosen carefully and the
advantages and disadvantages weighed carefully . They  were far
more interested in doing things properly than in actually getting
things done.
I left them to their fate and went back to the large conference
room.
Before the allotted time was up, the Red Group arrived with
triumphant grins. They congratulated one another for being the first
back. They’d clearly won the test.
I had to go and fetch all the other groups. The Yellow Group was
the slowest. I had to go back  twice before they deigned to make an
appearance. Two of them were talking on their phones, and the third
guy only managed to recover after having some cof fee and cake.
When all the groups had returned, I let them present their work.
The Red Group went triumphantly to the podium. They’d turned
the task into a race. They were ready in thirty minutes, even though
they had been given an hour. The rest of the time they’d spent
phon ing around to their coworkers, checking what they were doing
with their time. It was a sound presentation, a well-organized
structure, and properly thoug ht out. But about thirty seconds into the
report, it was clear that the Red Group had solved a completely

[PAGE 255]
different problem than what I’d given them. It wasn’t at all what I had
asked for .
When I asked if they had actually read the instructions, they all
began arguing . One of the men stated confidently that they’d
adapted the task to reality . They’d done a brilliant job. He expected
applause, but when the standing ovation didn’t materialize, the
members of the group shrugged their shoulders and returned to their
seats. A second after sitting  down, the woman in the group began
playing with her phone. A vital text message had to be sent
immediately .
After that, it was the Yellow Group’ s turn. This group consisted of
three women and two men. All of them smiled and stood at the front.
Who should begin? A brief deliberation took place before one of the
women charmed her way to the podium. She quickly plunged into
her topic, presenting the exciting discussions they’d had for the past
hour. She spoke for a while about the whole thing being an
inspirational exercise; she described how she was going to use the
insights she’d gained when she returned to her work. Her
presentation was very entertaining, and everyone laughed. I was
also amused by the woman’ s story , especially considering that it only
had one purpose: to camouflage the fact that the group hadn’t solved
the task. However , the Yellow Group did manage to get some
applause, mostly due to the high entertainment value of their
presentation.
Now it was time for the Green Group. It took a while  to get
everyone up to the podium. While the Yellow Group had squabbled
about who was going first, the Green Group was anxious. “Do all of
us go up?” “Who should present the report? Should I?” “Shouldn’t
you do it?” At least half of the six participants looked as if they had a
stomachache. Sure, this was the largest group but, nevertheless,
they were all nervous.
No one took command. After a moment of low-key deliberations,
one of the men began to speak. He faced the whiteboard most of the
time. He talked softly , turning  towards the members of his team for

[PAGE 256]
support. He was so subtle in his observations that the message was
hopelessly lost. With growing  desperation, he looked at his team for
help.
When their presentation was over, not even the Green Group had
solved the task, even though they had made more progres s than the
Yellow Group. I asked if everyone in the group was in agreement
about the material that was presented.
The unfortuna te spokesperson said that he thought that it was
probably true that most of them were relatively in agreement.  I asked
the group, and they all nodded in unison. At least four of the
participants in the group had grim faces, their arms crossed tightly
around their bodies—body language that proclaimed they were far
from agreeing with what had been said. One of the women looked
resentfully at the spokesperson. But, by Jove, she was in agreement.
Finally , the Blue Group marched up in line and stood in
alphabetical order , according to a prearranged agenda. Arne went
through the instructions, revealing that there were several points that
had made the task challenging. Among other things, he remarked on
the sentence structure in the document that I had handed out—he
spent most of the time explaining that it was better to say “advisor”
rather than “adviser ,” although both forms are technically correct—
and pointed out no fewer than two additional grammatical errors, on
the very first page.
Then it was Berit’s turn to go through the structure they had
based their work on, after being interrupted twice by Arne, who
believed that a few minor details needed to be clarified. When Kjell
took over, they still weren’t even close to providing a solution to the
problem. Stefan didn’t straigh ten out any issues, and when Yolanda
finally announced they neede d more time to finish the task properly ,
chaos erupted in the conference room.
The Red Group quickly brand ed the members of the Blue Group
complete idiots, the Yellow Group felt it was the most boring thing
they’d ever experienced, and the Green Group just suffered silently
through the whole show .

[PAGE 257]
Conclusions
The purpose of the whole exercise was to highlight that no group
should be composed solely of individuals of the same type. Diversity
is the only possible route. The best way to put a group of people
together is by mixing dif ferent types of people. This is the only way to
achieve decent dynamics in any group. This seems intuitive, but
despite this, most of the organizations I have encountered fail on this
fundamental requirement when they recruit people. Managers bring
in new people who are just like themselves because they understand
each other .
This book has been about explaining exactly why the groups in
this example worked the way they did and giving you the tools to
avoid similar problems in your own life. I hope that you found
pleasure in reading it and joining in this exciting explorat ion of how
people functio n, what makes them similar , and what makes them
different. Beca use we are all different. If you keep your eyes open,
you’ll find out exactly how dif ferent.
The rest is up to you.

[PAGE 258]
The Answers to the Questions in Chapter
20
  1.  Two Y ellows
  2.  Green with anyone
  3.  Red
  4.  Blue
  5.  Yellow
  6.  Blue
  7.  Blue
  8.  Blue
  9.  Red
10.  Yellow
11.  Green
12.  Yellow
13.  Red
14.  Yellow
15.  Red
16.  Red
17.  A mixture of all the colors
18.  Yellow
19.  Red
20.  Red
21.  Green
22.  Blue
23.  To this there is no given answer , as you might understand.

[PAGE 259]
Further Reading
Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking  by Malcolm Gladwell.
New Y ork: Back Bay Books, 2007.
Conversation Transformation: Recognize and Overcome the 6 Most
Destructive Communication Patterns  by Ben Benjamin, Amy
Yeager , and Anita Simon. New York: McGraw-Hill Education,
2012.
Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ by Daniel
Goleman. New Y ork: Bantam, 2005.
Feel the Fear … and Do It Anyway  by Susan Jeffers. Numerous
editions.
Get Your Sh*t Together: How to Stop Worrying About What You
Should Do So You Can Finish What You Need to Do and Start
Doing What You Want to Do by Sarah Knight. New York: Little,
Brown and Company , 2016.
How to Stop Worrying and Start Living  by Dale Carnegie. New York:
Gallery Books, 2004.
How to Win Friends and Influence People  by Dale Carnegie.
Numerous editions.
Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion  by Robert Cialdini. New
York: Harper Business, 2006.
Outliers: The Story of Success  by Malcom Gladwell. New York: Back
Bay Books, 201 1.
Quiet: The Power of Introvert s in a World That Can’t Stop Talking  by
Susan Cain. New Y ork: Broadway Books, 2013.

[PAGE 260]
Social Intelligence: The New Science of Human Relationships  by
Daniel Goleman. New Y ork: Bantam, 2007.
The 7 Habits  of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons in
Personal Change  by Stephen R. Covey . Numerous editions.
The 10 Dumbest Mistakes Smart People Make and How to Avoid
Them: Simple and Sure Techniques for Gaining Greater Control
of Your Life  by Arthur Freeman. New Y ork: William Morrow , 1993.
The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business
by Charles Duhigg. New Y ork: Random House, 2014.
The Ten Types of Human: A New Understanding of Who We Are,
and Who We Can Be by Dexter Dias. London: Random House
UK, 2017.
Types of Men by Eduard Spranger . Scottsdale, AZ: Target Training
International, 2013.

[PAGE 261]
Index
The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not
match the pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on
your eReading  device to search for terms of interest. For your
reference, the terms that appear in the print index are listed below .
A
accuracy, Blues and
activity, Marston’s model and
adapting
behavior when meeting Blues
behavior when meeting Greens
behavior when meeting Reds
behavior when meeting Yellows
to Blue behavior
to Green behavior
overview of
to Red behavior
to Yellow behavior
aggression, Reds and
air
alcohol
ambition, Reds and
analytic ability
anger. See also Temperament
Reds and
approachability, Yellows and
assessment, quiz for
attitudes and approaches, overview of
Aztecs

[PAGE 262]
B
bad news. See Feedback
balance, Greens and
behavior. See also Core behavior
causes of
defined
as toolbox
when meeting Blues
when meeting Greens
when meeting Reds
when meeting Yellows
black bile
blood
blood pressure
Blues
accuracy and
adapting to
behavior when meeting
body language of
caution and
combining with other colors
control and
criticism and
decision-making and
description of
details and
excuses and
feelings and
giving feedback to
helping with stress
as introverts
intuition and
lethargy and
listening and
logic and
mistakes and
modesty and
overview of
perception of by others
perception of by self
personal interaction and
pessimism and
preparation and

[PAGE 263]
quality and
realism and
risks and
rules and
silence and
speed and
spontaneity and
stress factors for
stress responses of
teamwork example and
temperament of
trust and
body language
of Blues
gaze and
of Greens
hands and
head and face and
importance of
overview of
posture and
of Reds
territory and
of Yellows
Bonnstetter, Bill
boredom, Yellows and
bullying, Reds and
C
Carter, Jimmy
caution, Blues and
change
Greens and
Reds and
Yellows and
children, influences on
choleric behavior
Clark, Walter
Clinton, Bill
clutter, Yellows and
combinations
challenging
of colors within individuals

[PAGE 264]
complementary
effective
natural
overview of
problematic
commitment, Greens and
communication. See also Body language
Blues and
Greens and
listeners and
written
Yellows and
company parties
competition, Reds and
compliance. See also DISA
conflict
Greens and
Reds and
Yellows and
control
Blues and
Reds and
cooperation
Greens and
Reds and
core behavior
as natural condition
origins of
core values, overview of
counterquestioning
creativity, Yellows and
criticism
Blues and
delivery of
Greens and
immunity to
Reds and
Yellows and
curiosity, Yellows and
D
deception
decision-making

[PAGE 265]
Blues and
Reds and
Yellows and
DeGeneres, Ellen
details
Blues and
Reds and
Yellows and
diligence, Reds and
DISA (Dominance, Inducement, Submission, Analytic ability) system
language of
overview of
statistics on use of
disorganization, Yellows and
dominance. See also DISA
E
early adopters
earth
efficiency, Reds and
egocentrism, Yellows and
egotism
Reds and
Yellows and
Einstein, Albert
elements
Elisabeth, feedback from
emails
emotional intelligence (EI)
emotional quotient (EQ)
Emotions of Normal People (Marston)
empathy, Yellows and
energy
Reds and
Yellows and
engagement, Greens and
enthusiasm, Reds and
excitement, Yellows and
exclusion, Reds and
excuses, Blues and
F
face, body language and

[PAGE 266]
fear, Greens and
feedback. See also Criticism
Blues and
delivery of
from Elisabeth
Greens and
from Håkan
from Helena
immunity to
Reds and
from Stefan
Yellows and
feelings, Blues and
fire
flattery, Yellows and
focus, Yellows and
fraud
friendship
Greens and
Yellows and
G
Gandhi, Mahatma
Gates, Bill
gaze, body language and
Gellberg, Sune
genetic factors
Greeks
Greens
adapting to
behavior when meeting
body language of
change and
collective good and
combining with other colors
commitment and
communication and
conflict and
criticism and
description of
engagement and
fear and
friendship and

[PAGE 267]
giving feedback to
helping with stress
as introverts
kindness and
leadership and
listening and
loose ends and
mistakes and
overview of
passivity and
perception of by others
perception of by self
predictability and
relationships and
reliability and
repetition and
responsibility and
routine and
security and
speed and
spotlight and
stability and
stress factors for
stress responses of
teamwork and
teamwork example and
temperament of
thoughtfulness and
tolerance and
unknown and
group dynamics, overview of
gut feelings
Blues and
Yellows and
H
Håkan, feedback from
hands, body language and
handshakes
head, body language and
Helena, feedback from
Hippocrates
honesty, Reds and

[PAGE 268]
humiliation, Yellows and
humoral pathology
I
impatience, Reds and
initiative, Reds and
inspiration. See also DISA
intellectual elasticity
introverts
Blues as
Greens as
intuition
Blues and
Yellows and
invisibility, Yellows and
isolation, Yellows and
J
Jobs, Steve
Jung, Carl
K
kindness, Greens and
L
language. See also Body language
learning
leadership, Greens and
learning
overview of
quiz for assessment of
lethargy, Blues and
Levit, Edouard
liars
lie detectors
limitations, Reds and
listening
Blues and
communication and
Greens and
Yellows and
logic, Blues and
loose ends, Greens and

[PAGE 269]
M
Marston, William Moulton
martyr complex
mistakes
Blues and
Greens and
Reds and
modesty, Blues and
mucus
N
negative feedback. See Feedback
normal behavior, overview of
O
Obama, Barack
Obama, Michelle
O’Connor, Sandra Day
opinions, Reds and
optimism
Reds and
Yellows and
organization, Yellows and
P
passivity
Greens and
Marston’s model and
perception
of Blues by others
of Blues by self
of Greens by others
of Greens by self
of Reds by others
of Reds by self
of self by others
of Yellows by others
of Yellows by self
perfect world
personal space, body language and
personal zone
personality, behavior and
persuasion, Yellows and
pessimism

[PAGE 270]
black bile and
Blues and
phlegm
phlegmatic behavior
pigeonholing
pigheadedness
popularity, Yellows and
posture, body language and
power, Reds and
predictability
Greens and
Reds and
Yellows and
preparation, Blues and
public speaking, Yellows and
Q
quality, Blues and
quiz, for assessment of learning
R
realism
Blues and
Reds and
Reds
adapting to
aggression and
ambition and
anger and
behaving when meeting
body language of
bullying and
change and
combining with other colors
competition and
conflict and
control and
cooperation and
criticism and
decision-making and
description of
details and
diligence and

[PAGE 271]
efficiency and
egotism and
energy and
enthusiasm and
exclusion and
giving feedback to
helping with stress
honesty and
impatience and
initiative and
lack of limitations and
limitations and
mistakes and
opinions and
optimism and
overview of
perception of by others
perception of by self
power and
realism and
repetition and
respect and
risks and
routine and
rules and
scapegoats and
speed and
stress factors for
stress responses of
strong opinions and
teamwork example and
temperament of
winning and
relationships
Greens and
Yellows and
reliability, Greens and
repetition
feedback and
Greens and
Reds and
respect, Reds and
responsibility, Greens and

[PAGE 272]
rhetoric, Yellows and
Rice, Condoleezza
risks
Blues and
Reds and
Rogers, Fred
Roosevelt, Franklin D.
routine
Greens and
Reds and
Yellows and
rules
Blues and
Reds and
S
sandwich method
sanguine behavior
scapegoats, Reds and
security, Greens and
self-centeredness, Yellows and
silence, Blues and
silent resistance
skepticism, Yellows and
slog or split phenomenon
social zone
speed
Blues and
Greens and
Reds and
Yellows and
spontaneity
Blues and
Yellows and
spotlight, Greens and
stability
DISA and
Greens and
Stefan, feedback from
stress factors
for Blues
Blues’ responses to
different responses to

[PAGE 273]
for Greens
Greens’ responses to
helping Blues with
helping Greens with
helping Reds with
helping Yellows with
overview of
for Reds
Reds’ responses to
for Yellows
Yellows’ responses to
structure, Yellows and
submission. See also DISA
overview of
surprises, Blues and
surrounding factors, behavior and
T
talking, Yellows and
teamwork. See also Combinations
example from everyday life
Greens and
temperament. See also Anger
of Blues
of Greens
overview of
of Reds
of Yellows
Teresa (Mother)
territory, body language and
Thatcher, Margaret
thoughtfulness, Greens and
time management, Yellows and
tolerance, Greens and
trouble-shooting, Yellows and
trust, Blues and
TTI Success Insights
U
unknown, Greens and
Utopia
V
values, core

[PAGE 274]
W
water
Williams, Robin
Williams, Venus
Winfrey, Oprah
winning, Reds and
written communication
Y
yellow bile
Yellows
adapting to
approachability and
behaving when meeting
body language of
boredom and
clutter and
combining with other colors
communication and
conflict and
creativity and
criticism and
curiosity and
decision-making and
description of
details and
disorganization and
egocentrism and
egotism and
empathy and
energy and
excitement and
flattery and
focus and
friendship and
giving feedback to
helping with stress
humiliation and
intuition and
invisibility and
isolation and
lack of focus and
listening and

[PAGE 275]
optimism, enthusiasm and
optimism and
organization and
overview of
perception of by others
perception of by self
persuasion and
popularity and
public speaking and
relationships and
rhetoric and
routine and
self-centeredness and
skepticism and
speed and
spontaneity and
stress factors for
stress responses of
structure and
talking and
teamwork example and
temperament of
thinking outside the box and
time management and
trouble-shooting and

[PAGE 276]
About the Author
THOMAS ERIKSON  is an expert on communication. He works with
developing organizations from a leadership perspective. In the past
eighteen years  he has trained more than five thousand executives to
be better and more efficient leaders. Thomas has written several
popular scienc e books on communication and human  behavior .
Surrounded by Idiots  is one of Sweden’ s bests elling nonfiction
books, with hundreds of thousands of copies sold in Sweden alone.
The book has been sold in more than thirty-five other languages
around the world. Y ou can sign up for email updates here.

[PAGE 277]
Thank you for buying this
St. Martin's Press ebook.
 
To receive special of fers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
 
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
 
For email updates on the author , click here.

[PAGE 278]
First published in the United States by St. Martin’ s Essentials, an imprint of St. Martin’ s
Publishing Group
SURROUNDED BY IDIOTS. Copyright © 2019 by Thomas Erikson. Foreword copyright © 2019
by David Bonnstetter . All rights reserved. For information, address St. Martin’ s Publishing
Group, 120 Broadway , New Y ork, NY 10271.
Translated by Martin Pender and Rod Bradbury
www .stmartins.com
Cover design by Pete Garceau
The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon request.
ISBN 978-1-250-17994-4 (hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-250-25517-4 (international, sold outside the U.S., subject to rights availability)
ISBN 978-1-250-17995-1 (ebook)
eISBN 9781250179951
Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please
contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945,
extension 5442, or by email at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com .
First published in Sweden as Omgiven av idioter  by HOI
First published in the United States by St. Martin’ s Essentials
First U.S. Edition: July 2019

[PAGE 279]
C o n t e n t s
Title Page
Copyright Notice
Foreword by David Bonnstetter
Introduction: The Man Who W as Surrounded by Idiots
 1. Communication Happens on the Listener ’ s T erms
 2. Why Are W e the W ay W e Are?
 3. An Introduction to the System
 4. Red Behavior:  How to Recognize a Real Alpha and A void
Getting in His W ay
 5. Y ellow Behavior:  How to Recognize Someone Whose Head Is in
the Clouds and Get Him Back to Reality Again
 6. Green Behavior: Why Change Is So Dif ficult and How to Get
Around It
 7. Blue Behavior: In Pursuit of Perfection
 8. No One Is Completely Perfect:  Strengths and W eaknesses
 9. Learning New Things:  How to Use What Y ou’ve Learned
10. Body Language: Why How Y ou Move Matters:  How Do Y ou
Really Look?
1 1. A Real-Life Example: The Company Party— How to
Understand Everyone Y ou Meet

[PAGE 280]
12. Adaptation:  How to Handle Idiots (i.e., Everyone Who Isn’t like
You)
13. How to Deliver Really Bad News:  The Challenge of Speaking
Your Mind
14. Who Gets Along and Why It W orks:  Group Dynamics at Their
Finest
15. W ritten Communication:  How to Evaluate Someone When Y ou
Can’t Meet in Person
16. What Makes Us as Mad as Hell?:  Temperament Can Reveal
Everything About a Person
17. Stress Factors and Energy Thieves:  What Is Stress?
18. A Short Reflection Through History:  People Have Always
Been like This
19. V oices from Real Life
20. A Quick Little Quiz to See What Y ou’ve Learned
21. A Final Example from Everyday Life: Perhaps the Most
Enlightening T eam Project in the History of the W orld
The Answers to the Questions in Chapter 20
Further Reading
Index
About the Author
Copyright