chapter 13 for more

chapter 13 for more
on this).
Some people, aware of these tendencies in our nature, may choose
to rebel and become nonconformists. But this can be equally mindless
and self-destructive. We are social creatures. We depend on our ability
to work with others. Rebelling for its own sake will simply marginalize
us.
What we need more than anything is group intelligence. This
intelligence includes a thorough understanding of the effect that
groups have on our thinking and emotions; with such awareness, we
can resist the downward pull. It also includes understanding how
human groups operate according to certain laws and dynamics, which
can make it easier to navigate through such spaces. With such
intelligence, we can do a delicate dance—we can become gifted social
actors and outwardly fit in, while inwardly maintaining some distance
and some mental space to think for ourselves. With this degree of
independence, we can make decisions in life that are appropriate to
who we are and our circumstances.
To acquire this intelligence, we must study and master the two
aspects of the social force outlined above—the individual effect of
groups on us and the patterns and dynamics that groups will almost
always tend to fall into.
The Individual Effect

[PAGE 453]
The desire to fit in: Let us say that you enter a group, as part of a
new job for instance. As you try to adjust to the environment, you
become aware that people are scrutinizing and judging you as the
outsider. On a nonverbal level, you feel their eyes probing you for
clues. You begin to wonder: Do I fit in? Have I said the right things?
What do they think of me? The first and primary effect on you in any
group is the desire to fit in and cement your sense of belonging. The
more you fit in, the less you pose a challenge to the group and its
values. This will minimize the scrutiny you face and the anxiety that
comes with it.
The first way you do this is through appearances. You dress and
present yourself more or less as the others do in the group. There are
always a small percentage of people who like to stand out in their look
but manage to conform when it comes to ideas and values. Most of us,
however, are uncomfortable looking too different, and we do what we
can to blend in. We adopt the clothes and looks that say the right thing
—I’m serious, I work hard, I may have style but not so much of it that I
stand out.
The second and more important way you fit in is by adopting the
ideas, beliefs, and values of the group. You may begin to use similar
verbal expressions as others, a sign of what’s happening below the
surface. Your own ideas slowly shape themselves to those of the group.
Some people may outwardly rebel against such conformity, but they
are usually the types who are eventually fired or marginalized. You
may hold on to a few peculiar beliefs or opinions that you largely keep
to yourself, but not on issues important to the group. The longer you
are in the group, the stronger and more insidious this effect.
If you observed this group from the outside, you would notice an
overall uniformity of thinking that is quite surprising, considering that
as individuals we all differ quite a bit from one another in
temperament and background. This is a sign of the subtle molding and
conformity that takes place. You might have joined a group because
you share their ideas and values, but you will find over time that the
parts of your thinking that were a little different from others, reflecting
your uniqueness, are slowly trimmed way, like a shrub made to match
the others, so that on almost all issues you agree with the group.
You are not aware of all this as it is happening to you. It occurs
unconsciously. In fact, you will tend to vociferously deny such

[PAGE 454]
conformity has ever taken place. You will imagine that you have come
upon these ideas on your own, that you have chosen to believe this and
think that. You don’t want to confront the social force operating on you
and causing you to blend in and enhance your sense of belonging. In
the long run, it is much better to confront your conformity to the group
ethos, so that you can become aware of it as it happens and control the
process to some degree.
The need to perform: Stemming from this first effect is the
second effect—in the group setting, we are always performing. It is
not just that we conform in appearances and thinking but that we
exaggerate our agreement and show others that we belong. In the
group, we become actors, molding what we say and do so that others
accept and like us and see us as loyal team members. Our
performances change depending on the size of the group and its
particular makeup—bosses or colleagues or friends. We might begin
with a degree of inner distance in these performances, aware, for
instance, that we are being unusually obsequious around the boss. But
over time, in acting the part we begin to feel what we are showing; the
inner distance melts away, and the mask we wear fuses into our
personality. Instead of thinking to smile in appropriate moments, we
automatically paste on the smile.
As part of this performance, we minimize our flaws and display
what we consider our strengths. We put on confidence. We act more
altruistic. Studies have shown that we are much more likely to give
money or help someone cross the road when others are looking at us.
In the group, we make sure that people see we support the right
causes; we post our progressive opinions prominently on social media.
We also make sure others see us working hard and putting in extra
hours. When we are alone, we often rehearse in our minds things we
will say or do for our next performance.
Do not imagine that it is better to simply be your natural self or to
rebel against this. There is nothing more unnatural than curbing this
need to perform, which even chimpanzees display to a high degree. If
you want to seem natural, as if you are comfortable with yourself, you
have to act the part; you have to train yourself to not feel nervous and
to shape your appearance so that in your naturalness you don’t offend
people or the group values. Those who sulk and refuse to perform end
up marginalized, as the group unconsciously expels such types.

[PAGE 455]
In any event, you should feel no shame about this need; there is
nothing you can do about it anyway, since in the group we
unconsciously mold our behavior to fit in. Better to be aware, to retain
that inner distance, and to transform yourself into a conscious and
superior actor, capable of altering your expression to fit the subgroup
and impressing people with your positive qualities.
Emotional contagion: When we were babies, we were highly
sensitive to the moods and emotions of our mother; her smiles elicited
our own, her anxiety made us tense. We evolved this high degree of
empathy to the emotions of the mother as a survival mechanism long
ago. Like all social animals, we are primed from an early age to sense
and pick up the emotions of others, particularly those close to us. This
is the third effect of the group on us—the contagiousness of emotions.
When we are alone, we are aware of our shifting moods, but the
moment we enter the group and feel the eyes of others upon us, we
become aware on unconscious levels of their moods and emotions,
which, if strong enough, can displace our own. In addition, among
those whom we feel comfortable and sense that we belong, we are less
defensive and more vulnerable to the contagious effect.
Certain emotions are more contagious than others, anxiety and fear
being the strongest of all. Among our ancestors, if one person sensed a
danger, it was important that others feel this as well. But in our present
environment, where the threats are less immediate, it is more like a
low-grade anxiety that passes quickly through the group, triggered by
possible or imagined dangers. Other highly contagious emotions are
joy and excitement, tiredness and apathy, and intense anger and
hatred. Desire is also highly contagious. If we see that others want to
possess something or follow some new trend, we are easily infected
with the same impulse.
All of these effects have a self-fulfilling dynamic: If three people are
feeling anxious, there must be a good reason for it. Now we become the
fourth, and it gains a reality that others find compelling. The more
people who feel it, the more others will catch it and the more intense it
becomes within us as individuals.
You can observe this in yourself by looking at your own emotions in
the moment and trying to decipher the effect others might have had on
them. Is the fear you are feeling related to something confronting you
in an immediate sense, or is it more secondhand, derived from what

[PAGE 456]
you have heard or sensed from others? Try to catch this as it occurs.
Discern which emotions are the most contagious for you, and how your
emotions shift with the various groups and subgroups you pass
through. Awareness of this gives you the power to control it.
Hypercertainty: When we are on our own and think about our
decisions and plans, we naturally feel doubts. Have we chosen the right
career path? Did we say the right thing to get the job? Are we adopting
the best strategy? But when we are in the group, this doubting,
reflective mechanism is neutralized. Let us say the group has to decide
on an important strategy. We feel the urgency to act. Arguing and
deliberating is tiring, and where will it end? We feel the pressure to
decide and get behind the decision. If we dissent, we might be
marginalized or excluded, and we recoil from such possibilities.
Furthermore, if everyone seems to agree that this is the right course of
action, we are compelled to feel confident about the decision. And so
the fourth effect on us is to make us feel more certain about what we
and our colleagues are doing, which makes us all the more prone to
taking risks.
This is what happens in financial crazes and bubbles—if everyone is
betting on the price of tulips or South Sea stock (see chapter 6) or
subprime mortgages, it must be a sure thing. Those who raise doubts
are simply being too cautious. As individuals, it is hard to resist what
others seem so certain about. We don’t want to miss out. Furthermore,
if we were among just a few who bought this stock, and it failed, we
would feel ridiculous and ashamed, sadly responsible for being such a
sucker. But covered by thousands doing the same, we are shielded
from feeling accountable, which increases the likelihood we will take
such risks in the group setting.
If as individuals we had some plan that was clearly ridiculous,
others would warn us and bring us back down to earth, but in a group
the opposite happens—everyone seems to validate the scheme, no
matter how delusional (such as invading Iraq and expecting to be
greeted as liberators), and there are no outsiders to splash some cold
water on us.
Whenever you feel unusually certain and excited about a plan or
idea, you must step back and gauge whether it is a viral group effect
operating on you. If you can detach yourself for a moment from your
excitement, you might notice how your thinking is used to rationalize

[PAGE 457]
your emotions, to confirm the certainty you want to feel. Never
relinquish your ability to doubt, reflect, and consider other options—
your rationality as an individual is your only protection against the
madness that can overcome a group.
Group Dynamics
Since the beginning of recorded history, we can observe certain
patterns that human groups fall into almost automatically, as if they
were subject to particular mathematical or physical laws. The following
are the most common dynamics that you must study in the groups that
you belong to or pass through.
Group culture: When we travel to another country, we are aware
of the differences in culture from our own. Not only do the inhabitants
have their own language, but they also have customs, ways of looking
at the world and thinking, that are different from our own. This is
more pronounced among nations which have long traditions, but to a
subtler extent we can see the same thing happening with a company or
office. It is all part of the social force blending and knitting the group
together based on the particular chemistry of its members.
When looking at your own group and its culture, think in terms of
style and the overall mood that prevails. Is it loosely structured, with
an easygoing style? Or is it organized top down, its members afraid of
stepping out of line or breaking discipline? Do its members feel
superior and separate from the rest of the world, displaying an elitist
attitude, or does the group pride itself on its populism? Does it see
itself as cutting-edge or more traditionalist?
Does information flow easily throughout the group, giving it an
open feel, or does the leadership control and monopolize this flow?
Does it have a masculine feel to it—a hypercompetitive edge and a
more rigid chain of command—or does it have a more fluid, feminine
spirit that emphasizes cooperation over hierarchy? Does it seem
riddled with dysfunction and disunity, its members more concerned
with their egos than with getting actual results, or does it emphasize
productivity and the quality of the work? To answer these questions,
don’t pay much attention to what the group says about itself, but rather
examine its actions and the emotional tone that prevails within.
Its style can have degrees of the above qualities, or combinations of
them, but the group will always have some type of identifiable culture

[PAGE 458]
and spirit. Two things to keep in mind: First, the culture will often
center on an ideal that the group imagines for itself—liberal, modern,
progressive, ruthlessly competitive, tasteful, et cetera. The group may
not live up to this ideal, but to the degree that it tries to, the ideal
operates as a myth that binds the group’s members. Second, this
culture will often reflect the founders of the group, particularly if they
have a strong personality. With their own rigid or loose style, they have
put their stamp on the group, even if it numbers in the thousands. But
leaders who enter a group or company that has its set culture will often
find themselves completely absorbed by this culture, even though they
might think of altering it.
The U.S. Department of Defense, housed in the Pentagon, emerged
from World War II with a very strong, hawkish spirit. Both presidents
Kennedy and Johnson had their own views on the Pentagon and
altering its culture; they both wanted to avoid entangling the U.S. in
the Vietnam War. But this aggressive culture ended up altering their
ideas and dragging them into the war. Many film directors in
Hollywood have thought of doing things their own way, only to find
themselves swallowed up by an entrenched culture that emphasizes
top-down control and micromanagement by producers, with their
interminable notes. This culture has existed for close to ninety years,
and no individual has been able to alter it.
Better to be aware and realize that the larger the group and the
more established the culture over time, the more likely it will control
you than the other way around.
One thing to keep in mind: no matter the type of culture, or how
disruptive it might have been in its origins, the longer a group exists
and the larger it grows, the more conservative it will become. This is an
inevitable result of the desire to hold on to what people have made or
built, and to rely on tried-and-true ways to maintain the status quo.
This creeping conservatism will often be the death of the group,
because it slowly loses the ability to adapt.
Group rules and codes: For any human group, disorder and
anarchy are too distressing. And so standards of conduct and rules for
how to do things quickly evolve and become set. These rules and codes
are never written down but are implicit. Violate them in some way and
you risk becoming a nonentity or even being fired, without necessarily
knowing the cause. In this way, the group imposes its own order

[PAGE 459]
without the need for active policing. The codes will regulate acceptable
appearances, how much free talk is encouraged in meetings, the
quality of obedience in relation to bosses, the expected work ethic, et
cetera.
When you are new to a group, you must pay extra attention to these
tacit codes. Look at who’s rising and who’s falling within the group—
signs of the standards that govern success and failure. Does success
stem more from results or from political schmoozing? Look at how
hard people work when not being observed by bosses. You could work
too hard or do a job too well and find yourself fired for making others
look bad. There are inevitably sacred cows within the group—people or
beliefs never to be criticized. Consider all of these as trip wires you
must avoid at all costs. Sometimes a particular member of higher
standing serves as the de facto policeman or policewoman for these
rules and codes. Identify such individuals and avoid any friction with
them. It’s not worth it.
The group court: Observe any community of chimpanzees at the
zoo, and you will notice the existence of an alpha male and other
chimpanzees adapting their behavior to him, fawning, imitating, and
struggling to forge closer ties. This is the prehuman version of the
court. We humans created a more elaborate version in aristocratic
courts, dating from the earliest civilizations. In the aristocratic court,
the subordinate members depended on the king or queen’s favor to
survive and thrive; the object of the game was to get closer to the man
or woman on top without alienating the other courtiers, or to gang up
and depose the leader, always a risky venture.
Today the court will form around the film executive, the head of an
academic department, the CEO of a business venture, the political
boss, the owner of an art gallery, a critic or artist who has cultural
power. In a large group, there will be subcourts formed around
subleaders. The more powerful the leader, the more intense is the
gamesmanship. The courtiers may look different now, but their
behavior and strategies are pretty much the same. You must take note
of a few of these behavioral patterns.
First, courtiers have to gain the attention of leaders and ingratiate
themselves in some way. The most immediate way to do this is through
flattery, since leaders inevitably have large egos and a hunger to have
their high self-opinion validated. Flattery can do wonders, but it comes

[PAGE 460]
with risks. If it is too obvious, the flatterer looks desperate, and it is
easy to see through the strategy. The best courtiers know how to tailor
their flattery to the particular insecurities of the leader and to make it
less direct. They focus on flattering qualities in the leader that no one
else has bothered to pay attention to but that need extra validation. If
everyone praises the leader’s business acumen but not his or her
cultural refinement, you will want to aim at the latter. Mirroring the
leader’s ideas and values, without using their exact words, can be a
highly effective form of indirect flattery.
Keep in mind that forms of acceptable flattery will differ in each
court. In Hollywood, it must be more effusive than in academia or in
Washington DC. Adapt your flattery to the group spirit, and make it as
indirect as possible.
Of course, it is always wise to impress bosses with your efficiency
and to make them dependent on your usefulness, but be careful of
taking this too far: if they feel you are too good at what you do, they
may come to fear their dependence on you and wonder about your
ambition. Make them feel comfortable in the superiority they believe
they possess.
Second, you must pay great attention to the other courtiers.
Standing out too much, being seen as too brilliant or charming, will
stir up envy, and you will die by a thousand bites. You want as many
courtiers on your side as possible. Learn to downplay your successes,
to listen (or seem to listen) deeply to the ideas of others, strategically
giving them credit and praise in meetings, paying attention to their
insecurities. If you must take action against particular courtiers, make
it as indirect as possible, working to slowly isolate them in the group,
never appearing too aggressive. Courts are always supposed to seem
civilized. Be aware that the best courtiers are consummate actors and
that their smiles and professions of loyalty mean very little. In the
court, it does not pay to be naive. Without being paranoid, try to
question people’s motives.
Third, you need to be aware of the types of courtiers you will find in
most courts and the particular dangers they can pose. One aggressive
but clever courtier with little conscience can quickly dominate the
group. (For more on the types of courtiers, see the next section.)
Keep in mind that there is no way to opt out of the court dynamic.
Trying to act superior to the political games or the need to flatter will

[PAGE 461]
only make you look suspicious to others; nobody likes the holier-than-
thou attitude. All you’ll get for your “honesty” is to be marginalized.
Better to be the consummate courtier and find some pleasure in the
game of court strategy.
The group enemy: As mentioned above, our ancestors had a
reflexive fear at the sight of any outsiders to their group. This fear
easily slid into hatred. The basis for this fear may well have been real,
but the existence of rival tribes also had a positive side effect—it united
and tightened the group. It also fit in well with the way the human
brain processes information, through binary pairs of opposites—light
and dark, good and evil, us versus them. Today, in our modern
sophisticated world, you will notice this very ancient dynamic
continually at play: any group will reflexively focus on some hated
enemy, real or imagined, to help bring the tribe together. As Anton
Chekhov once noted, “Love, friendship, respect do not unite people as
much as common hatred for something.”
Since time immemorial, leaders have exploited this enemy reflex for
power, using the existence of the rival or enemy to justify almost
anything and to distract from their own shortcomings. The enemy will
be described as “amoral,” “irrational,” “untrustworthy,” or
“aggressive,” the implication being that “our” group is the opposite. No
side ever likes to admit it is not pure in its ethics, or has aggressive
intentions, or is governed by emotion—it is always the other side. In
the end, the need to feel a part of the tribe and against the other side is
more important than the actual differences, which tend to be greatly
exaggerated.
Look at the group you belong to, and you will inevitably see some
sort of enemy or bogeyman to push against. What you require is the
ability to detach yourself from this dynamic and to see the “enemy” as
it is, minus the distortions. You will not want to overtly display your
skepticism—you might be seen as disloyal. Instead, keep your mind
open so that you can resist the downward pull and overreactions that
come from such tribal emotions. Take this even a step further by
learning from the enemy, adapting some of its superior strategies.
Group factions: Over enough time, individuals in a group will
begin to split off into factions. The reason for this dynamic is simple:
In a group, we get a narcissistic boost from being around those who
share our values. But in a group over a certain size, this becomes too

[PAGE 462]
abstract. The differences among the members become noticeable. Our
power to influence the group as individuals is reduced. We want
something more immediate, and so we form subgroups and cliques
with those who seem even more like us, giving us back that narcissistic
boost. In this subgrouping, we now have power to divvy up, which
increases its members’ sense of self-importance. Eventually the faction
will experience its own splits from within, on and on. This splitting
occurs unconsciously, almost as if it were responding to mechanical
laws of group fission.
If a faction gets strong enough, its members will start to give
precedence to its interests over that of the greater group. Some leaders
try to exploit this dynamic by playing one faction off the other, in the
form of divide and conquer: the more the factions fight, the weaker
they become, and the greater the power in the hands of the man or
woman on top. Mao Zedong was a master at this game, but it is a
dangerous one, because too much time tends to be wasted dealing with
petty internal squabbles, and it can be hard to keep them all down. If
left alone, factions can become so powerful they take over and depose
or control the leaders themselves. Better to tighten the whole group by
creating a positive culture that excites and unifies its members, making
factions less attractive. (For more on this, see the last section of this
chapter.)
One faction to pay particular attention to is the one that is formed
by those in the higher echelons, which we can identify as the elites in
the group. Although elites themselves sometimes split into rival
factions, more often than not, when push comes to shove, they will
unite and work to preserve their elite status. The clan tends to look
after its own, all the more so among the powerful. They will inevitably
manage to bend the group rules to ensure they tilt in their favor. In
these democratic times, they will try to cover this up by posturing that
what they are doing is for the greater good of the group. If the elites
prosper, so will everyone else, they say. But you will never actually see
the elite faction doing things that will lessen their power, or making
true sacrifices. Somehow it is always those not among the elites who
must make the sacrifices. Try not to fall for their rationalizations or
cover stories, and to see this faction for what it is.
—

[PAGE 463]
Your task as a student of human nature is twofold: First, you must
become a consummate observer of yourself as you interact with groups
of any size. Begin with the assumption that you are not nearly as much
of an individual as you imagine. To a great extent, your thoughts and
belief system are heavily influenced by the people who raised you, your
colleagues at work, your friends, and the culture at large. Be ruthlessly
frank with yourself. Look at how your ideas and beliefs alter the longer
you stay at a job or within a particular group. You are under subtle
pressure to get along and to fit in, and you will respond to this without
being aware.
To see this clearly, think of how many times you have promoted an
idea that is contrary to what the group wants on some fundamental
issue and held on to this idea for a long period. It will probably be quite
rare. Look at the bad decisions the group has taken, and how often you
went along with them. If this conformity becomes too ingrained in you,
you will lose the ability to reason on your own, your most prized
possession as a human. As a thought experiment, sometimes try
entertaining an idea that is the very opposite of the group you belong
to or the conventional wisdom. See if there is any value in deliberately
going against the grain.
We are all permeable to the influence of the group. What makes us
more permeable is our insecurities. The less we are certain about our
self-worth as individuals, the more we are unconsciously drawn toward
fitting in and blending ourselves into the group spirit. Gaining the
superficial approval of group members by displaying our conformity,
we cover up our insecurities to ourselves and to others. But this
approval is fleeting; our insecurities gnaw at us, and we must
continually get people’s attention to feel validated. Your goal must be
to lower your permeability by raising your self-esteem. If you feel
strong and confident about what makes you unique—your tastes, your
values, your own experience—you can more easily resist the group
effect. Furthermore, by relying upon your work and accomplishments
to anchor your self-opinion, you won’t be so tied to constantly seeking
approval and attention.
It is not that you become self-absorbed or cut off from the group—
outwardly you do what you can to fit in, but inwardly you subject the
ideas and beliefs of the group to constant scrutiny, comparing them
with your own, adapting parts or all of those that have merit and

[PAGE 464]
rejecting others that go against your experience. You are putting the
focus on the ideas themselves, not on where they come from.
Your second task is to become a consummate observer of the groups
you belong to or interact with. Consider yourself an anthropologist
studying the strange customs of an alien tribe. Look deeply at the
culture of your group, how it “feels” from within, the feeling contrasted
to other groups you have worked with or belonged to. You are catching
the social force as it molds the group into an organism, the sum greater
than its parts.
Most people intuitively sense the rules and codes of behavior in the
group. You want to take this further by observing these rules in action
and making your knowledge of them more conscious: Why do they
exist? What do they say about the group? Gaining a deeper
appreciation of the culture and codes will make it much easier to
navigate the social space and maintain a degree of detachment. You
will not try to change what cannot be changed. When it comes to the
inevitable factions that emerge, it is better to keep yourself unaligned
and let others fight over you. You do not need to belong to a faction to
derive a narcissistic boost. What you want within the group is strategic
options and room to maneuver, to have many allies and widen your
power base.
Your goal in this second task is to maintain as tight a grip on reality
as possible. Groups tend to share beliefs and ways of looking at the
world that are one-sided. They give greater weight to information that
fits into their preconceived notions. They exaggerate qualities of rivals
or enemies. They become overoptimistic about their plans. Taken far
enough, the group can hold beliefs that are quite delusionary, and its
actions can border on madness. Observing the group with a degree of
distance will help you be aware of the distorting effect on your
perception that can come from being so embedded within a group.
Your strategies and decisions will be all the more effective for this.
Just as groups tend to exert a downward pull on our emotions and
behavior, we can also experience or imagine the opposite—a group that
exerts an upward pull. We shall call this ideal the reality group. It
consists of members who feel free to contribute their diverse opinions,
whose minds are open, and whose focus is on getting work done and
cooperating on a high level. By maintaining your individual spirit and

[PAGE 465]
your grip on reality, you will help create or enrich this ideal team of
people. (For more on this, see “The Reality Group” on this page.)
This ability to observe the group and detach ourselves is more
critical now than ever for several reasons. In the past, people’s sense of
belonging to certain groups was more stable and secure. To be a
Baptist or a Catholic or a communist or a French citizen provided one
with a strong sense of identity and pride. With the diminishing power
of these large-scale belief systems, we have lost this inner security, and
yet we retain the same profound human need to belong. So many of us
are searching for groups to join, hungry for the approval of others who
share our values. We are more permeable than ever. This makes us
eager to become a member of the latest cult or political movement. It
makes us highly susceptible to the influence of some unscrupulous
populist leader who preys upon this need.
Instead of forming large-scale groups, we now form tribes of
diminishing size, to get a greater narcissistic boost. We view larger
groups with suspicion. Social media abets this dynamic by making it
easier to spread the narrowly focused views and values of the tribe and
making them viral. But these tribes don’t last long; they are continually
disappearing or regrouping or splitting apart. And so the ancient need
to belong is never satisfied and drives us mad.
Tribalism has its roots in the deepest and most primitive parts of
our nature, but it is now coupled with much greater technological
prowess, which makes it all the more dangerous. What allowed us
thousands of years ago to bind our group tightly and survive could now
easily lead to our extinction as a species. The tribe feels its very
existence at stake by the presence of the enemy. There is little middle
ground. Battles can be more intense and violent between tribes.
The future of the human race will likely depend on our ability to
transcend this tribalism and to see our fate as interconnected with
everyone else’s. We are one species, all descendants of the same
original humans, all brothers and sisters. Our differences are mostly an
illusion. Imagining differences is part of the madness of groups. We
must see ourselves as one large reality group and experience a deep
sense of belonging to it. To solve the man-made problems threatening
us will require cooperation on a much higher level and a practical spirit
missing from the tribe. This does not mean the end of diverse cultures

[PAGE 466]
and the richness that comes with them. In fact, the reality group
encourages inner diversity.
We must come to the conclusion that the primary group we belong
to is that of the human race. That is our inevitable future. Anything
else is regressive and far too dangerous.
The Court and Its Courtiers
Any type of court obviously revolves around the leader, the courtiers’
power depending on the relative closeness of their relationship with
this leader. Although leaders come in many varieties, one dynamic is
fairly universal: the courtiers (minus the cynical types, see below) will
tend to idealize those in power. They will see their leaders as smarter,
cleverer, more perfect than is the reality. This will make it easier for
them to justify their fawning behavior.
This dynamic is similar to what we all experienced in childhood: we
idealized our parents in order to feel more secure about the power they
had over us. It was too frightening to imagine our parents as weak or
incompetent. Dealing with authority figures in the court tends to
regress us to our childhood and the family dynamic. The way we
adapted to our parents’ power and the presence of our siblings will
play itself out again in adult form in the court. If we felt the deep need
to please our parents in every way in order to feel more secure, we will
become the pleaser type in the court. If we resented our siblings for the
parental attention they drew away from us, and tried to dominate these
siblings, we will be the envious type and resort to passive aggression.
We may want to monopolize the leaders’ attention as we once tried to
do with our mother or father.
And so we can say that courtiers tend to fall into certain types,
depending on deep patterns stemming from childhood. Some of these
types can become quite dangerous if they accumulate power within the
court, and they are usually adept at disguising their negative qualities
in order to rise from within. It is best to be able to identify them as
early as possible and take necessary defensive action. The following are
seven of the more common types you will find.
The Intriguer: These individuals can be particularly difficult to
recognize. They seem intensely loyal to the boss and to the group. No
one works harder or is more ruthlessly efficient. But this is a mask they

[PAGE 467]
wear; behind the scenes they are continually intriguing to amass more
power. They generally have a disdain for the boss that they are careful
to conceal. They feel they could do the job better, and they yearn to
prove this. Perhaps they had competitive issues in childhood with the
father figure.
In the court of Richard Nixon, Alexander Haig (1924–2010)
epitomized this type. A graduate of West Point and a decorated war
hero in Vietnam, he was hired as one of several assistants to Henry
Kissinger, Nixon’s national security adviser. Kissinger’s own little court
was filled with men with brilliant academic backgrounds. Haig could
not compete on this level; he stayed away from policy arguments.
Instead, he so expertly tailored himself to the desires and needs of
Kissinger that he quickly rose from within. He organized Kissinger’s
desk, streamlined his schedule, and would do the lowliest task, even
helping his boss dress for an important evening. He silently suffered
Kissinger’s numerous and volcanic temper tantrums. But what
Kissinger did not realize was the depth of Haig’s ambitions and his
contempt for his boss. He was continually playing to the real boss in
the game, Nixon himself.
While Kissinger was out most evenings attending some party, Nixon
would see the light on in Haig’s office at all hours. Nixon, a workaholic
himself, could not help but admire this. Of course, Haig made sure he
worked evenings when Nixon was there and would notice him. Soon
Nixon was borrowing him for his own tasks. In 1973, as the Watergate
scandal blossomed, Nixon appointed Haig as his chief of staff. This
infuriated Kissinger—not only did he feel Haig had used him for his
own purposes, but he was now having to report to Haig as a superior.
To make matters worse, Haig had seen up close all of Kissinger’s
weaknesses and had a lot of dirt on him, and Kissinger was certain he
would be sharing this information with Nixon, who loved such gossip.
To colleagues Haig could be chummy and even disarming. But behind
the scenes he undercut almost everyone in his path, wiretapping their
phones, putting his name on their ideas and memos.
As the Watergate crisis deepened and Nixon fell into a depression,
Haig slowly took over operations, with a zeal that surprised and
disgusted many. For several months, he became the de facto president.
This pattern repeated throughout his career. As Ronald Reagan’s
secretary of state, after the assassination attempt on the president in
1981, Haig told reporters, “I am in control here.”

[PAGE 468]
In identifying this type, you must look behind the efficient and loyal
front and even the charm. Keep your eye instead on their maneuvers
and their impatience to rise from within. Look at their past record for
signs of intrigue. They are masters at making leaders, and others,
dependent on their efficiency as means of binding them and securing
their own position. Pay attention to that little extra zeal they display to
please the boss and make themselves useful. Realize that when they
are looking at you, they are thinking of how they can use you as a tool
or stepping-stone. Imagining themselves blessed with brilliance, they
have little compunction in doing whatever is necessary to advance
themselves. It is best to keep your distance and not become one of
their pawns, nor their enemy.
The Stirrer: This type is generally riddled with insecurities but adept
at disguising them from those in the court. They feel deep wells of
resentment and envy for what others seem to have that they don’t, part
of their childhood pattern. Their game is to infect the group with
doubts and anxieties, stirring up trouble, which puts them at the center
of action and may allow them to get closer to the leader. They will often
target another courtier who triggers their envy, and they will spread
rumors and innuendo about the courtier in question, playing upon the
latent envy of other courtiers. They will be full of secret information for
the leader about those who might be less than perfectly loyal. The more
turmoil and emotions they can stir up, the better they can take
advantage of the situation.
If a rebellion of some sort suddenly erupts within the court, you can
be sure they had a finger in it. All it takes is one good Stirrer in a court
to create endless drama and discord, making life intolerable for
everyone. They actually get a secret pleasure from doing so. They will
cover their tracks by being hyperrighteous and indignant about the
“betrayals” of others. They project such a front of loyalty and devotion
to the cause that it is hard to suspect them of being so manipulative.
If you notice courtiers who “innocently” share with you some
rumor, be wary—they could be of this type, and you may be the target
of such rumors at some point. If you feel the group succumbing to viral
anxiety about some vague threat, try to locate the source of this—you
might have a Stirrer in your midst. They can be tricky—they can
project an extra cheery and optimistic front to conceal the churning
negativity within. Always look behind the mask and notice the secret
delight they have when something bad happens. When dealing with a

[PAGE 469]
known Stirrer, do not directly or indirectly insult or show disrespect.
Even though they are quite insensitive to the feelings of those they
malign, they are hypersensitive to any sign of disrespect to them, and
since they have fewer compunctions than you, they will make your life
miserable through their passive-aggressive campaigns.
The Gatekeeper: The goal of the game for these types is gaining
exclusive access to leaders, monopolizing the flow of information to
them. They may resemble the Intriguer in their willingness to use
people to get to this position, but unlike that type, their objective is not
to take over power. They are motivated not by a secret disdain for
others but by their intense adoration for the person on top. They often
rise to the position by fawning over the genius and perfection of the
leader, whom they idealize. (There might even be a slight sexual edge
to their attraction.) They ingratiate themselves with leaders by giving
them a great deal of narcissistic supply. As Gatekeepers, they keep
away irritating courtiers and buffer leaders from petty political
struggles, which seems to make them quite useful.
In gaining such proximity, they also get to see the leaders’ dark
sides and learn of their weaknesses; this unconsciously binds leaders
even more tightly to Gatekeepers, whom they might fear alienating.
Having such power over the admired leader is their endgame. This
type can also become the policeman or policewoman in the court,
making sure the group adheres to the ideas and beliefs of the leader.
Once such types are installed in power, they are extremely
dangerous—running afoul of them in any way will cut off key access to
the one player on the board who matters the most, and other perks.
Recognize them early on by their shameless sycophancy toward the
boss. These types obviously wear a very different face to other courtiers
from what they present to leaders, and you can try to gather evidence
to reveal their duplicity to the leader before it is too late. But they
generally are masters at understanding and playing to the insecurities
of bosses and come to know them better than you do. They can easily
turn your efforts around. In general, it is best to recognize their power
and remain on their good side. If you’re a leader, beware of such types.
They will tend to isolate you from the group, and isolation is
dangerous.
The Shadow Enabler: Leaders are often in a difficult position. They
have to bear the responsibility for what happens to the group and the

[PAGE 470]
stress that goes with that. At the same time, they must maintain a
reputation that is above reproach. More than others, they have to keep
their Shadow side (see chapter 9) under wraps. This could be
extramarital desires they have had to repress, or paranoia about the
loyalty of everyone around them, or the craving to do some violence
against a hated enemy. Unconsciously their Shadow is yearning to
come out. In steps the Enabler, one of the cleverest and most diabolical
courtiers of all.
These types often are closer to their own Shadow, aware of their
own darkest yearnings. In childhood they probably felt these desires
deeply but had to repress them, which made such desires all the more
powerful and obsessive. As adults, they search for complicit partners
with whom they can bring the Shadow out into the open. They are
masters at detecting repressed desires in others, including leaders.
They may begin in conversation to broach somewhat taboo subjects,
but in a nonthreatening, jocular way. The leader falls into the spirit
and opens up a bit. Having established contact with the leader’s
Shadow, the Enabler then takes this further, with suggestions of
possible actions for leaders, ways to vent their frustrations, with the
Enabler handling it all and serving as protection.
Charles Colson, special counsel to President Nixon, carved out just
such a role for himself. He knew his boss to be quite paranoid about all
of the enemies supposedly surrounding him. Nixon was also quite
insecure about his own masculinity and yearned to punish his
purported enemies and display some swagger. He felt deeply frustrated
in not being able to act on these desires. Colson played on his worst
instincts, allowing Nixon to vent his feelings in meetings and then
insinuating ways to act on them, such as revenge schemes against
hated reporters. Nixon found this too tempting and too therapeutic to
resist. Colson shared some of these hidden sadistic desires himself,
and so this was the perfect way for him to live out his own Shadow.
In any court, there are inevitably those with a low character, who
live for scheming and knocking heads. They are not overtly violent or
evil but simply have fewer compunctions than others. If they are
Enablers and inveigle their way into a position close to the boss, there
is little you can do against them. It is too dangerous to cross such
types, unless what they are planning is so dark that it is worth risking
your own position to stop them. Take heart that their careers are
generally short. They often serve as the fall guy if what they advocated,

[PAGE 471]
or acted on, becomes public. Be aware that they may try to play the
game with you. Do not take the first step into any dubious actions they
are trying to draw you into. Your clean reputation is the most
important thing you possess. Maintain a polite distance.
The Court Jester: Almost every court has its Jester. In the past they
wore a cap and bells, but today they come in different varieties and
looks. They can be the court cynic and scoffer, who has license to poke
fun at almost everyone and everything, including sometimes the
leaders themselves, who tolerate this because it shows their apparent
lack of insecurity and sense of humor. Another variety is the
domesticated rebel. Such types are allowed to go against the dress
code, display looser behavior, and espouse unconventional opinions.
They can be a bit flamboyant. In meetings, unlike anyone else, they are
allowed to come up with wild opinions contrary to the group. Such
nonconformists prove that the leaders encourage the free exchange of
opinions, at least in appearance.
These types fall into such roles because secretly they have a fear of
responsibility and a dread of failing. They know that as Jesters they are
not taken seriously and are given little actual power. Their humor and
antics give them a place in the court without the stress of actually
having to get things done. Their “rebelliousness” never really
represents a threat or challenge to the status quo. In fact, they make it
so others in the group can feel a bit superior to the in-house oddball,
more comfortable in conforming to the norm.
Never take their existence as a sign that you can freely imitate their
behavior. There is rarely more than one Jester per court for a reason. If
you feel the pull to rebel against the norms of the group, better to keep
it as subtle as possible. Often the modern court will tolerate differences
in appearances but not so much in ideas and political correctness.
Better to reserve your nonconformity for your private life, or until you
have amassed more power.
The Mirrorer: These types are often among the most successful
courtiers of all, because they are capable of playing the double game to
the hilt—they are adept at charming leaders and fellow courtiers,
maintaining a broad base of support. Their power is based on the idea
that everyone at heart is a narcissist. They are masters at reflecting
back to people their own moods and ideas, making them feel validated
without sensing the manipulation, as opposed to using overt flattery.

[PAGE 472]
In the court of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Frances Perkins, FDR’s
secretary of labor and longtime adviser, was the consummate player of
this game. She had high levels of empathy and could sense Roosevelt’s
moods. She would adapt to them. She knew he loved to hear stories, so
any idea she presented to him she would present with some type of
story line, and this would charm him. She listened to whatever he said
with much more attention than anyone else and could later refer
verbatim to something “brilliant” he had said, which proved how
deeply she had listened.
If she was going to recommend an action that might meet some
resistance, she would couch it as one of his own ideas from the past,
but with a slight modification of her own. She could decipher the
meaning of his various types of smiles, knowing when she could go
further with her idea and when to stop in her tracks. And she made
certain to confirm his idealized image of himself as the noble warrior
fighting on behalf of the disenfranchised. To other courtiers, she
presented herself in the most nonthreatening manner, never making a
show of her influence over her boss and applying the same type of
charm to everyone who crossed her path. In this way she made it hard
to feel threatened or envious of her powers.
This is a role you might want to consider playing in the court
because of the power it brings, but to pull it off you will have to be a
great reader of people, sensitive to their nonverbal cues. You want to
be able to mirror their moods, not just their ideas. This will cast a spell
over them and lower their resistance. With leaders, you must be aware
of their idealized opinion of themselves and always confirm it in some
way, or even encourage them to live up to it. Those on top are lonelier
and more insecure than you imagine, and they will lap this up. As
mentioned before, overt flattery can be dangerous because people can
see through it, but even if they see through your mirroring, they will
remain charmed and want more.
The Favorite and the Punching Bag: These two types occupy the highest
and lowest rungs of the court. Every king or queen must have his or
her Favorite within the court. As opposed to the other types, whose
power generally depends on efficiency and demonstrations of abject
loyalty, the Favorite’s rise in power is often based on cultivating a more
personal, friend-like relationship. Early on, they act relaxed and
chummy with the leader, without seeming disrespectful. Many leaders
are secretly dying to not have to be so formal and in control.

[PAGE 473]
Sometimes leaders who are lonely will pick out one person to occupy
this position. With the Favorite, they will gladly share secrets and
bestow favors. This, of course, will stir up the envy of other courtiers.
This position is fraught with danger. First, it depends on the
friendly feelings of leaders, and such feelings are inevitably fickle.
People are more sensitive to the words or actions of friends, and if they
feel somehow disappointed or betrayed in any way, they can go from
liking to hating the former friend. Second, the Favorite receives so
much privileged treatment that they often become arrogant and
entitled. Leaders might tire of their spoiled behavior. Courtiers are
already envious of the Favorite, but their increased arrogance only
alienates them further. When Favorites fall from grace—and history is
littered with such stories—the fall is hard and painful. No one comes to
their defense, and because their rise did not depend on any special
skill, they often have nowhere else to go. Try to avoid being lured into
taking this position. Make your power dependent on your
accomplishments and your usefulness, not on the friendly feelings
people have for you.
Much as in any children’s playground, in the court there is almost
always a person who plays the role of the Punching Bag, whom
everyone feels encouraged to laugh at in some way and feel superior to.
People today are more politically correct and careful, and yet this
human need for a Punching Bag is too embedded in our nature. People
will base their feeling of superiority on the Punching Bag’s supposed
incompetence, or unorthodox opinions, or lack of sophistication,
whatever makes them seem different and somehow inferior. Much of
their ridicule will be behind the back of the targets, but they will sense
it. Do not engage in this dynamic. It will coarsen and debase you. See
everyone in the court as your potential ally. Within the ruthless
environment of the court, try to befriend the Punching Bag, showing a
different way of behaving and taking the fun out of this cruel game.
The Reality Group
When a group of people fails in some enterprise, we often see the
following dynamic play itself out: The first reaction is to look at the
actors involved and affix blame. Perhaps it was the overambitious
leader who led the group into failure, or the incompetent lieutenant, or
the very shrewd adversary. Perhaps some bad luck was involved as

[PAGE 474]
well. The leader or lieutenant may be fired and a new team brought in.
Leadership learns a few lessons from the experience, and these are
shared. Everyone in the group feels satisfied and ready to move on.
Then, a few years down the line, nearly the same problem and the
same type of failure recurs, and the same tired solutions are recycled.
The reason for this common pattern is simple: what is really at fault
is the dysfunctional dynamic of the group, which tends to produce
incompetent lieutenants and grandiose leaders. And unless it is fixed,
the problems keep recurring with different faces.
In a dysfunctional culture, the members are often confused about
their roles and the overall direction of the group. Amid such confusion,
people start to think more of their own interests and agendas, and they
form factions. Worried more about their status than the health of the
group, their egos become touchy, and they obsess over who’s getting
more. In this contentious atmosphere, the bad apples—the Stirrers, the
men and women of low character—find numerous ways to stir trouble
and promote themselves. Those who excel at schmoozing and playing
politics but little else often thrive, rise to the top, and become
lieutenants. Mediocrity is preferred and rewarded.
Leaders find themselves dragged down by all the internal
dissension and gamesmanship. Feeling vulnerable, they surround
themselves with courtiers who tell them what they want to hear. Inside
this court cocoon, leaders hatch ill-conceived and grandiose plans,
which are encouraged by the spineless courtiers. Firing the leader or
lieutenants won’t change anything. The next ones will simply find
themselves infected and transformed by the dysfunctional culture.
What we must do to avoid this trap is to alter our perspective:
instead of instantly focusing on individuals and the drama of the failed
action, we must focus on the overall group dynamic. Fix the dynamic,
create a productive culture, and not only will we avoid all of the above
evils but we will trigger a much different, upward pull within the
group.
What creates a functional, healthy dynamic is the ability of the
group to maintain a tight relationship to reality. The reality for a group
is as follows: It exists in order to get things done, to make things, to
solve problems. It has certain resources it can draw upon—the labor
and strengths of its members, its finances. It operates in a particular
environment that is almost always highly competitive and constantly

[PAGE 475]
changing. The healthy group puts primary emphasis on the work itself,
on getting the most out of its resources and adapting to all of the
inevitable changes. Not wasting time on endless political games, such a
group can accomplish ten times more than the dysfunctional variety. It
brings out the best in human nature—people’s empathy, their ability to
work with others on a high level. It remains the ideal for all of us. We
shall call this ideal the reality group.
Certainly, a true reality group is a rare occurrence in history—to
some degree we saw it in action with the famed battalions of Napoleon
Bonaparte, or the early years of IBM under Thomas Watson, or the
initial cabinet Franklin Roosevelt formed, or the film team assembled
by the great director John Ford that worked with him for decades, or
the Chicago Bulls under basketball coach Phil Jackson. From these
examples, and others, we can learn some valuable lessons about the
components of the reality group and how leaders can shape one.
The following are five key strategies for achieving this, all of which
should be put into practice. Keep in mind that if you inherit a culture
that is firmly set and dysfunctional, your job is harder and it will take
more time. You need to be resolute in the changes you want to effect
and have patience, being careful that the culture does not slowly
assimilate you. Think of it as war, and the enemy is not individuals but
the dysfunctional group dynamic.
Instill a collective sense of purpose. That social force that compels
people to want to belong and to fit in you want to capture and channel
for a higher purpose. You accomplish this by establishing an ideal—
your group has a definite purpose, a positive mission that unites its
members. This could be creating a product that is superior and unique,
that makes life easier or brings pleasure; or improving conditions for
those in need; or solving some seemingly intractable problem. This is
the ultimate reality of the group, why it was formed in the first place.
This purpose is not vague or implied but clearly stated and publicized.
No matter the type of work, you want to emphasize excellence and
creating something of the highest possible quality. Making money or
being successful should be a natural result of this ideal and not the goal
itself.
To make this work, the group must practice what you preach. Any
signs of hypocrisy or noticeable discrepancy between the ideal and the
reality will destroy your efforts. You want to establish a track record of

[PAGE 476]
results that reflect the group’s ideal. Groups will tend to lose
connection to their original purpose, particularly with any success. You
want to keep reminding the group of its mission, adapting it if
necessary but never drifting from this core.
We often like to reduce the behavior of people to base motives—
greed, selfishness, the desire for attention. Certainly we all have a base
side. But we also possess a nobler, higher side that often is frustrated
and cannot find expression in the ruthless world today. Making people
feel an integral part of a group creating something important satisfies a
deep yet rarely met human need. Once members experience this, they
are motivated to keep the healthy dynamic alive and vital. With its
relatively high esprit de corps, the group will police itself. People who
are petty and all about ego will stand out and be isolated. With clarity
about what the group represents and the role they are to play,
members are less likely to form factions. Everything becomes easier
and smoother if you instill this collective purpose.
Assemble the right team of lieutenants. As the leader of a reality group,
you need the ability to focus on the larger picture and the overall goals
that matter. You have only so much mental energy, and you must
marshal it wisely. The greatest obstacle to this is your fear of delegating
authority. If you succumb to micromanaging, your mind will become
clouded by all the details you try to keep on top of and the battles
among the courtiers. Your own confusion then filters down through
the group, ruining the effect of the first strategy.
What you need to do from the outset is to cultivate a team of
lieutenants, imbued with your spirit and the collective sense of
purpose, whom you can trust to manage the execution of ideas. To
achieve this, you must have the right standards—you do not base your
selection on people’s charm, and never hire friends. You want the most
competent person for the job. You also give great consideration to their
character. Some people can be brilliant, but in the end their poisonous
personalities and egos make them a drain on the group’s spirit. (For
more on judging character, see