chapter
11 for more on this). Similarly, if there is a problem, the masculine

chapter
11 for more on this). Similarly, if there is a problem, the masculine
style is to try to figure it out on one’s own—to ask for assistance would
be an admission of weakness. In general, men will overestimate their
abilities and display confidence in their skills that are often not
warranted by circumstances.
For women, it is the opposite: When there is failure, they tend to
blame themselves and look inward. If there is success, they are more
prone to look at the role of others in helping them. They find it easy to
ask for assistance; they do not see this as a sign of personal
inadequacy. They tend to underestimate their skills and are less prone
to the grandiose confidence that often fuels men.
For those with the masculine style, when it comes to learning and
improving yourself, it is best to reverse the order—to look inward when
you make mistakes and to look outward when you have success. You
will be able to benefit from experience by dropping the feeling that
your ego is so tied to the success of each action or decision you make.
Develop this reversal as a habit. Don’t be afraid of asking for help or
feedback; instead, make this a habit as well. Weakness comes from the
inability to ask questions and to learn. Lower your self-opinion. You
are not as great or skilled as you imagine. This will spur you to actually
improve yourself.

[PAGE 390]
For those with the feminine style, it is easy to beat yourself up after
failures or mistakes. The introspection can go too far. The same can be
said of ascribing success to others. Women more than men will suffer
from low self-esteem, which is not natural but acquired. They often
have internalized critical voices from others. Jung called these animus
voices: all the men over the years who have judged women for their
looks and intelligence. You want to catch these voices as they occur and
rid yourself of them. Because failures or criticisms might affect you too
deeply, you can become afraid to try something again, which narrows
your learning possibilities. You need to adopt more of the masculine
self-confidence, without the attendant stupidity. In your daily
encounters, try to drop or minimize your emotional responses to
events and see them from a greater distance. You are training yourself
to not take things so personally.
Masculine and feminine styles of relating to people and leadership: As with
male chimpanzees, in a group setting the masculine style is to require a
leader, and to either aspire to that role or gain power by being the most
loyal follower. Leaders will designate various deputies to do their
bidding. Men form hierarchies and punish those who fall out of line.
They are highly status conscious, hyperaware of their place in the
group. Leaders will tend to use some element of fear to keep the group
cohesive. The masculine style of leadership is to identify clear goals
and reach them. It puts emphasis on results, however they are
achieved.
The feminine style is more about maintaining the group spirit and
keeping the relationships smoothed out, with fewer differences among
individuals. It is more empathetic, considering the feelings of each
member and trying to involve them more in the decision-making
process. Results are important, but the way they are achieved, the
process, is equally important.
For those with the masculine style, it is important to enlarge your
concept of leadership. When you think more deeply about the
individuals on the team and strategize to involve them more, you can
have superior results, engaging the energy and creativity of the group.
Studies have shown that boys are as empathetic as girls, highly
attuned, for instance, to the emotions of the mother. But empathy is
slowly drummed out of men as they come to develop their assertive
style. Some of the greatest male leaders in history, however, managed
to retain and develop their empathy. A leader such as Sir Ernest Henry

[PAGE 391]
Shackleton (see chapter 2) was no less of a man for his constant
consideration of the emotions of each of the men he was responsible
for—he was simply a stronger and more effective leader. The same
could be said of Abraham Lincoln.
For those of the feminine style, you must not be afraid of assuming
a strong leadership role, particularly in times of crisis. Considering the
feelings of everyone and incorporating the ideas of too many will
weaken you and your plans. Although women are certainly better
listeners, sometimes it is best to know when to stop listening and go
with the plan you have opted for. Once you recognize the fools, the
incompetents, and the hyperselfish in the group, it is best to fire them
and to even find pleasure in getting rid of those who bring the whole
group down. Instilling a touch of fear in your lieutenants is not always
a bad thing.
—
Finally, look at it this way: We are compelled by nature to want to
move closer to what is feminine or masculine, in the form of an
attraction to another person. But if we are wise, we realize we are
equally compelled to do so inwardly. For centuries men have looked to
women as muses, sources of inspiration. The truth is that the muse, for
both genders, lies within. Moving closer to your anima or animus will
bring you closer to your unconscious, which contains untapped
creative treasures. The fascination you feel in relation to the feminine
or masculine in others you will now feel in relation to your work, to
your own thought process, and to life in general. Just as with shamans,
that inner wife or husband will become the source of uncanny powers.
What is most beautiful in virile men is something feminine; what is most
beautiful in feminine women is something masculine.
—Susan Sontag

[PAGE 392]
13
Advance with a Sense of Purpose
The Law of Aimlessness
Unlike animals, with their instincts to guide them past dangers, we
humans have to rely upon our conscious decisions. We do the
best we can when it comes to our career path and handling the
inevitable setbacks in life. But in the back of our minds we can sense
an overall lack of direction, as we are pulled this way and that way
by our moods and by the opinions of others. How did we end up in
this job, in this place? Such drifting can lead to dead ends. The way to
avoid such a fate is to develop a sense of purpose, discovering our
calling in life and using such knowledge to guide us in our decisions.
We come to know ourselves more deeply—our tastes and inclinations.
We trust ourselves, knowing which battles and detours to avoid. Even
our moments of doubt, even our failures have a purpose—to toughen
us up. With such energy and direction, our actions have unstoppable
force.
The Voice
Growing up in a staunchly middle-class black neighborhood in Atlanta,
Georgia, Martin Luther King Jr. (1929–1968) had a pleasant and
carefree childhood. His father, Martin Sr., was the pastor of the large
and thriving Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, so the Kings were
relatively well off. His parents were loving and devoted to their
children. Home life was stable and comfortable and included
Grandmother King, who doted on young Martin Jr. He had a wide
circle of friends. The few encounters he had with racism outside the
neighborhood marred this idyllic childhood but left him relatively
unscathed. Martin Jr., however, was exceptionally sensitive to the

[PAGE 393]
feelings of those around him. And as he got older, he sensed something
from his father that began to trigger some inner tension and
discomfort.
His father was a strict disciplinarian who set solid boundaries of
behavior for the three King children. When Martin Jr. misbehaved in
any way, his father whipped him, telling the boy this was the only way
to turn him into a real man. The whippings continued until he was
fifteen. Once his father caught Martin Jr. at a church social dancing
with a girl, and his scolding of the boy in front of his friends was so
vehement, Martin Jr. strove to never repeat the experience by causing
his father’s displeasure. But none of this discipline came with the
slightest hint of hostility. Martin Sr.’s affection for his son was too real
and palpable for the boy to feel anything but guilt for disappointing
him.
And such feelings of guilt were all the more stressful for Martin Jr.
because of the high hopes the father placed on his son. As a boy,
Martin Jr. displayed an unusual way with words; he could talk his
friends into almost anything, and his eloquence was quite precocious.
He was certainly bright. A plan formed in Martin Sr.’s mind that his
elder son would follow in his father’s footsteps—attending Morehouse
College in Atlanta, becoming ordained as a minister, serving as
copastor at Ebenezer, and then eventually inheriting the father’s
position, just as Martin Sr. had inherited it from his father-in-law.
Sometimes the father shared this plan, but more than anything else
the boy could feel the weight of his father’s expectations in the prideful
way he looked at him and treated him. And it made him anxious. He
deeply admired his father—he was a man of very high principle. But
Martin Jr. could not avoid sensing the growing differences between
them in taste and temperament. The son was more easygoing. He
loved attending parties, wearing nice clothes, dating girls, and dancing.
As he got older, he developed a pronounced serious and introspective
side and was drawn to books and learning. It was almost as if there
were two people inside of him—one social, the other solitary and
reflective. His father, on the other hand, was not complicated at all.
When it came to religion, Martin Jr. had his doubts. His father’s
faith was strong but simple. He was a fundamentalist who believed in a
literal interpretation of the Bible. His sermons were aimed at the
emotions of his parishioners, and they responded in kind. Martin Jr.,

[PAGE 394]
on the other hand, had a cool temperament. He was rational and
practical. His father seemed more concerned with helping people in
the afterlife, whereas the son was more interested in life on earth and
how it could be improved and enjoyed.
The thought of becoming a minister intensified these inner
conflicts. At times he could imagine himself following his father’s
career path. As someone deeply sensitive to any form of suffering or
injustice, serving as a minister could be the perfect way to channel his
desire to help people. But could he be a minister with such tenuous
religious faith? He hated any kind of confrontation with his father,
with whom it was impossible to argue. He developed the strategy of
always saying yes to whatever his father said. His way of dealing with
the tension inside him was to postpone any decision that might cause a
rift. And so, when he graduated from high school at the age of fifteen,
he decided to attend Morehouse, delighting his father. But in his mind
he had a plan—he would study everything that interested him and
decide on his own the path he would take.
In the first few months he thought of a career in medicine, then
sociology, then law. He kept changing his mind about a major, excited
by all the subjects now open to him. He took a class in Bible studies,
and he was pleasantly surprised at the profound, earthy wisdom in the
book. There were professors at Morehouse who approached
Christianity from a very intellectual angle, and he found this quite
appealing. By his last year at Morehouse he had changed his mind yet
again: he would become ordained as a minister, and he would enroll at
Crozer Theological Seminary, located in Pennsylvania, for a divinity
degree. Now his father was quite ecstatic. He understood it was best to
let Martin Jr. explore religion on his own, as long as he ended up at
Ebenezer.
At Crozer, Martin Jr. discovered a whole other side to Christianity,
one that emphasized social commitment and political activism. He
read all of the major philosophers, devoured the works of Karl Marx,
and became fascinated with the story of Mahatma Gandhi. Finding the
life of an academic a pleasant one, he decided to continue his studies at
Boston University, where he gained a reputation among his professors
as a brilliant scholar in the making. But as he prepared to graduate in
1954 from Boston University with a PhD in systematic theology, he
could no longer postpone the inevitable. His father had lined up for
him an irresistible offer—a position as copastor at Ebenezer and a part-

[PAGE 395]
time teaching position at Morehouse, where he could continue the
academic studies he loved.
Martin had recently married, and his wife, Coretta, wanted them to
stay in the North, where life would be easier than in the troubled
South. He could get a teaching job at almost any university he wanted.
It was tempting to fall for either option—Ebenezer or teaching at a
northern university. They would certainly lead to a comfortable life.
In the past few months, however, he had had a different vision of
his future. He could not rationally explain where this came from, but it
was clear to him: He would return to the South, where he felt a primal
connection to his roots. He would become the minister of a large
congregation in a good-sized city, a place where he could help people,
serve the community, and make a practical difference. But it would not
be in Atlanta, as his father had planned. He was not destined to be a
professor or merely a preacher molded by his father. He would have to
resist the easy path. And this vision had become too strong for him to
deny it any longer—he would have to displease his father, breaking the
news as gently as possible.
Several months before graduating, he heard of an opening at Dexter
Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama. He visited the
church and gave a sermon there, impressing the church’s leaders. He
found the congregation at Dexter more solemn and thoughtful than at
Ebenezer, which suited his own temperament. Coretta tried to
dissuade him from such a choice. She had grown up not far from
Montgomery, and she knew how fiercely segregated the city was, and
the many ugly tensions below the surface. Martin would encounter
there a virulent racism he had never experienced in his relatively
sheltered life. To Martin Sr., Dexter and Montgomery spelled trouble.
He added his voice to Coretta’s. But when Dexter offered Martin Jr. the
job, he did not experience his usual ambivalence and need to think
things over. For some reason, he felt certain about the choice; it
seemed fateful and right.
Established at Dexter, Martin Jr. worked hard at imposing his
authority (he knew he looked a bit too young for the position). He
devoted a great deal of time and effort to his sermons. Preaching
became his passion, and he soon gained a reputation as the most
formidable preacher in the area. But unlike many other pastors, his
sermons were full of ideas, inspired by all of the books he had read. He

[PAGE 396]
managed to make these ideas relevant to the day-to-day lives of his
congregation. The key theme he had begun to develop was the power of
love to transform people, a power that was desperately underused in
the world and that blacks would have to adopt in relation to their white
oppressors in order to change things.
He became active in the local chapter of the NAACP, but when he
was offered the position of president of the chapter, he turned it down.
Coretta had just given birth to their first child, and his responsibilities
as a father and as a minister were great enough. He would remain very
active in local politics, but his duty was to his church and family. He
reveled in the simple and satisfying life he was now leading. His
congregation adored him.
In early December of 1955, Dr. King (as he was now known)
watched with great interest as a protest movement began to take shape
in Montgomery. An older black woman named Rosa Parks had refused
to give up her seat on the bus to a white man, as prescribed by the local
law for segregated buses. Parks, an active member of the local NAACP
chapter, had spent years fuming at this treatment of black people and
at the abusive behavior of bus drivers. Finally she had had enough. For
her defiance of the law she was arrested. This served as a catalyst for
activists in Montgomery, and they decided upon a one-day boycott of
Montgomery buses to show their solidarity. Soon the boycott stretched
into a week, then several weeks as organizers managed to create a
substitute system of transportation. One of the organizers of the
boycott, E. D. Nixon, asked King to take a leading role in the
movement, but he was reluctant. He had so little time to spare from his
congregation work. He would do what he could to lend his support.
As the boycott gained momentum, it became clear to its leaders that
the local chapter of the NAACP was not big enough to handle it. They
decided they would form a new organization, to be called the
Montgomery Improvement Association. Because of his youth, his
eloquence, and what seemed to be his natural leadership skills, at a
local town meeting those who had formed the MIA nominated King to
be its president. It was an offer they half expected him to refuse—they
knew of his past hesitations. King, however, could feel the energy in
the room and their faith in him. Without his usual careful
premeditation, he suddenly decided to accept.

[PAGE 397]
As the boycott continued, the white administrators who controlled
the city became increasingly adamant in their refusal to end the
segregated practices on the city’s buses. The tension was escalating—
several blacks involved in the boycott movement had been shot at and
assaulted. In the speeches he now delivered to large crowds at the MIA
meetings, King developed his theme of nonviolent resistance, invoking
the name of Gandhi. They would defeat the other side through peaceful
protests and justified boycotts; they would take the campaign further,
aiming at complete integration in Montgomery’s public places. Now
the local authorities saw King as a dangerous man, an interloper from
outside the state. They initiated a whispering campaign, inventing all
sorts of rumors to be spread about King’s youthful indiscretions,
insinuating he was a communist.
Almost every night he received phone calls threatening his life and
that of his family, and such threats were not to be taken lightly in
Montgomery. A normally reserved man, he did not like all of the
attention from the press, which had now become national. There was
so much bickering within the MIA leadership, and the whites in power
were so devilishly tricky. It was all so much more than he had
bargained for when he had decided to become the MIA leader.
Several weeks after assuming the leadership position, King was
arrested while driving, ostensibly for speeding, and placed in a cell full
of the most hardened criminals. Once bail was posted, a trial was set
for two days later, and who could guess what trumped up charges they
might come up with? The night before his trial he received yet another
phone call: “Nigger, we are tired of you and your mess now. And if you
aren’t out of this town in three days we’re going to blow your brains
out, and blow up your house.” Something in the tone of the caller’s
voice sent chills down his spine—this seemed more than just a threat.
He tried to sleep that night but couldn’t, the man’s voice on the
phone call replaying in his mind. He went into the kitchen to make
some coffee and calm himself down. He was shaking. He was losing his
nerve and his confidence. Couldn’t he just find a way to gracefully bow
out of his leadership position and return to the comfortable life of
being just a minister? As he examined himself and contemplated his
past, he realized that up until these weeks he had never really known
true adversity. His life had been relatively easy and happy. His parents
had given him everything. He had not known what it was like to feel
such intense anxiety.

[PAGE 398]
And as he went deeper with these thoughts, he realized that he had
simply inherited religion from his father. He had never personally
communicated with God or felt His presence from within. He thought
of his newborn daughter and the wife he loved. He couldn’t take much
more of this. He couldn’t call his father for advice or solace—it was well
past midnight. He felt a wave of panic.
Suddenly it came to him—there was only one way out of this crisis.
He bowed over the cup of coffee and prayed with a sense of urgency he
had never felt before: “Lord, I must confess that I’m weak now. I’m
faltering. I’m losing my courage. And I can’t let the people see me like
this, because if they see me weak and losing my courage, they will
begin to get weak.” At that moment, clear as could be, he heard a voice
from within: “Martin Luther, stand up for righteousness. Stand up for
justice. Stand up for truth. And lo, I will be with you, even until the end
of the world.” The voice—that of the Lord, he felt sure—promised to
never leave him, to come back to him when he needed it. Almost
immediately he felt a sense of tremendous relief, the burden of his
doubts and anxiety lifted from his shoulders. He could not help but
cry.
Several nights later, while King was attending an MIA meeting, his
house was bombed. By sheer luck, his wife and daughter were
unharmed. When informed of what had happened, he remained calm.
He felt that nothing could rattle him now. Addressing an angry crowd
of black supporters who had congregated outside his home, he said,
“We are not advocating violence. We want to love our enemies. I want
you to love our enemies. Be good to them. Love them and let them
know you love them.” After the bombing, his father pleaded with him
to return with his family to Atlanta, but with Coretta’s support, he
refused to leave.
Over the following months there would be many challenges as he
struggled to keep the boycott alive and maintain the pressure on the
local government. Finally, toward the end of 1956, the Supreme Court
affirmed a lower court decision ending bus segregation in
Montgomery. On the morning of December 18, King was the first
passenger to board the bus and sit wherever he liked. It was a great
victory.
Now came national attention and fame, and with it endless new
problems and headaches. The death threats continued. The older black

[PAGE 399]
leaders in the MIA and the NAACP came to resent the attention he now
received. The infighting and the clash of egos became almost
intolerable. King decided to start a new organization, to be called the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, its purpose to take the
movement beyond Montgomery. For King, however, the infighting and
envy only followed him.
In 1959 he returned to his hometown to serve as copastor at
Ebenezer and to lead various SCLC campaigns from the headquarters
in Atlanta. For some in the movement he was too charismatic, too
domineering, and his campaigns too ambitious; for others he was too
weak, too willing to compromise with white authorities. The criticism
from both sides was relentless. But what added most of all to King’s
burdens was the slippery and infuriating tactics of the whites in power,
who had no intention of accepting any substantial changes in
segregation laws or in practices that discouraged blacks from
registering to vote. They negotiated with King and agreed to
compromises, then as soon as the boycotts and sit-ins stopped, they
found all kinds of loopholes in the agreements and backtracked.
In one campaign King led in Albany, Georgia, to desegregate the
city, the mayor and police chief made a show of exaggerated calmness,
making it seem as if King and the SCLC were the unreasonable group,
just stirring up trouble from the outside.
The campaign in Albany was largely a failure, and it left King
depressed and exhausted. It was now the pattern in his life that in such
moments he yearned for the simpler, easier days of the past—his happy
childhood, his pleasant years at the university, the first year and a half
at Dexter. Perhaps he should retire from the leadership role and devote
his time to preaching, writing, and lecturing. Such thoughts tugged
him at him with greater frequency.
Then, toward the end of 1962, he received yet another request for
his services: Fred Shuttlesworth, one of the leading black activists in
Birmingham, Alabama, begged King and the SCLC to help him in his
efforts to desegregate stores in the downtown area. Birmingham was
one of the most fiercely segregated cities in the country. Rather than
comply with federal laws to desegregate public places, such as
swimming pools, they merely closed them down. Any form of protest
against the segregation practices was met with powerful violence and
terrorism. The city had come to be known as “Bombingham.” And

[PAGE 400]
overseeing this bastion of the segregated South was the police chief,
Bull Connor, who seemed to relish the chance to use force—whips,
attack dogs, high-pressure fire hoses, billy clubs.
This would certainly be the most dangerous campaign so far.
Everything inside King leaned toward turning it down. The old doubts
and fears returned to him. What if people were killed, and the violence
touched him and his family? What if he failed? He suffered more
sleepless nights as he agonized over this.
Then the voice from seven years before returned to him, as loud and
clear as ever: he had been tasked to stand up for justice, not to think of
himself but to think of the mission. How foolish to be afraid again. Yes,
it was his mission to go to Birmingham. But as he mulled this over, he
could not help thinking more deeply about what the voice had told
him. Standing up for justice meant bringing it about in some real and
practical way, not talking or settling for useless compromises. His fears
of disappointing people and failing had made him too cautious. He
would have to be more strategic and more courageous this time. He
would have to raise the stakes and he would have to win. No more fears
or doubts.
He accepted Shuttlesworth’s offer, and as he planned the campaign
with his team, he made it clear to them they would need to learn from
past mistakes. King laid out to them the nature of the predicament
they faced. The Kennedy administration had proven to be incredibly
cautious when it came to civil rights. The president feared alienating
congressional southern Democrats, upon whom he depended. He
would make great promises but keep dragging his feet.
What they needed to do in Birmingham was to provoke a national
crisis, one that was bloody and ugly. The racism and segregation in the
South were largely invisible to moderate whites. Birmingham seemed
like just another sleepy southern town. Their goal must be to make the
racism so visible to the whites watching television that it would strike
their consciences, and with a growing sense of outrage, pressure would
be placed on the Kennedy administration that it could no longer resist.
Most of all, King was counting on the cooperation of Bull Connor in his
plans—his overreaction to the intensity of their campaign would be the
key to the whole drama they were hoping to enact.
In April 1963 King and his team put their plan into action. They
attacked on multiple fronts with sit-ins and demonstrations. Although

[PAGE 401]
reluctant because of his fear of jails, King got himself arrested. This
would garner more publicity and stir the local population to emulate
him. But the campaign had a fatal weakness that became apparent only
as it evolved: local black support for the movement was tepid. Many
blacks in Birmingham resented Shuttlesworth’s autocratic style; others
reasonably feared the violence Connor would unleash. King depended
on large and boisterous crowds, but what he got was far from that. The
national press, not smelling a story, started to leave.
Then one of the leaders on his team, James Bevel, had an idea—they
would enlist the participation of students in local schools. King had his
fears and argued they should not bring in anyone under the age of
fourteen, but Bevel reminded him of the high stakes and the need for
numbers, and King relented. Many of those inside the organization and
sympathizers were shocked that King could be so pragmatic and
strategic in using such young people, but the campaign had a higher
purpose, and it was no time to be so delicate.
The students responded with great enthusiasm. It was just what the
movement needed. They filled the streets of Birmingham, more daring
and boisterous than their parents. Soon they were filling up the jails.
The press returned en masse. Out came the high-pressure fire hoses,
the attack dogs, and the night sticks, striking teenagers and even
children. Soon television screens around America were broadcasting
the tense, dramatic, and bloody scenes that ensued. Enormous crowds
now showed up for King’s speeches, drumming up support for the
cause. Federal authorities were forced to intervene to lessen the
tension.
King had learned his lesson from before—he had to keep up the
pressure to the very end. Representatives of the white power structure
reluctantly opened negotiations with King. At the same time, he
sanctioned the demonstrators to continue their downtown marches,
coming from all directions and stretching Connor’s police force to the
breaking point. Frightened local merchants had had enough and asked
the white negotiators to work on a comprehensive settlement with the
black leaders, essentially desegregating the downtown stores and
agreeing to the hiring of black employees.
It was his greatest triumph so far; he had realized his ambitious
goal. It did not matter now if the white authorities backtracked, as they
inevitably would; Kennedy was caught in the trap, his own conscience

[PAGE 402]
pricked by what he had seen in Birmingham. Shortly after the
settlement, he addressed the nation on television, explaining the need
for immediate progress in civil rights and proposing some ambitious
new laws. This led to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which paved the way
for the Voting Rights Act of 1965. It made King the undisputed leader
of the civil rights movement, and soon a winner of the Nobel Peace
Prize. Money now poured into the SCLC, and the movement seemed to
have ineluctable momentum. But as before, the troubles and burdens
for King only seemed to increase with each new victory.
In the years following Birmingham he sensed a powerful reaction
forming among conservatives and Republicans against the gains of the
movement. They would work to halt further progress. He learned that
the FBI had placed listening devices in his hotel rooms and had spied
on him for years; they were now leaking stories and rumors to various
newspapers. He watched as America descended into cycles of violence,
starting with the assassination of Kennedy.
He saw a new generation of black activists emerge under the banner
of Black Power, and they criticized his adherence to nonviolence as
weak and antiquated. When King moved the campaign to Chicago to
try to stop discriminatory housing practices there, he brokered a
settlement with local authorities, but black activists around the country
harshly criticized him—he had settled for far too little. Shortly after
this, an audience at a Chicago Baptist church loudly booed him,
drowning out his talk with chants of “Black Power.”
He grew depressed and despondent. In early 1965, he saw images of
the Vietnam War in a magazine, and it sickened him. Something was
deeply wrong with America. That summer he toured the Watts
neighborhood in Los Angeles after the violent riots that had scorched
the area. The sight of so much poverty and devastation overwhelmed
him. Here in the heart of one of the most affluent cities in America, the
center of the fantasy industry, was an enormous neighborhood where
large numbers of people lived in poverty and felt no hope for the
future. And they were largely invisible. America had a cancer in its
system—extreme inequalities in wealth, and the willingness to spend
vast sums of money on an absurd war, while blacks in inner cities were
left to rot and riot.
His depression now mixed with growing anger. In his conversations
with friends, people noticed a new edge to him. In one retreat with his

[PAGE 403]
staff, he said, “All too many people have seen power and love as polar
opposites. . . . [But] the two fulfill each other. Power without love is
reckless, and love without power is sentimental.” At another retreat, he
talked of new tactics. He would never abandon nonviolence as the
means, but the civil disobedience campaign would have to be altered
and intensified. “Nonviolence must mature to a new level . . . mass civil
disobedience. There must be more than a statement to the larger
society, there must be a force that interrupts its functioning at some
key point.” The movement was not about integrating blacks into the
values of American society but about actively altering those values at
their root.
He would add to the civil rights movement the need to address
poverty in inner cities and to protest the Vietnam War. On April 4,
1967, he expressed this widening of the struggle in a speech that got
lots of attention, almost all negative. Even his most ardent supporters
criticized it. Including the Vietnam War would only alienate the public
from the cause of civil rights, they said. It would anger the Johnson
administration, whose support they depended upon. It was not part of
his mandate to speak so broadly.
He had never felt so alone, so attacked by his many critics. By early
1968 his depression had become deeper than ever. He felt the end was
near—some among his many enemies were going to kill him for all that
he had said and done. He was exhausted by the tension and felt
spiritually at a loss. In March of that year, a pastor in Memphis,
Tennessee, invited King to his city, hoping he could help support a
strike by black sanitation workers, who had been treated horribly.
There had been marches, boycotts, and protests, and the police had
responded brutally. The situation was explosive. King put them off—he
felt depleted. But as so often happened in these circumstances, he
realized it was his duty to do what he could, and so he agreed. On
March 18 he addressed an enormous crowd in Memphis, and their
enthusiastic response cheered him up. He heard that voice once again
supporting and urging him forward. Memphis would have to be a key
part of his mission.
For the next few weeks he kept returning to Memphis to lend his
support and assistance, against the fierce resistance of the local
authorities. On Wednesday evening, April 4, he addressed another
crowd: “We got some difficult days ahead. But it really doesn’t matter
with me now, because I’ve been to the mountaintop. . . . Like anybody,

[PAGE 404]
I would like to live a long life. . . . But I’m not concerned about that
now. I just want to do God’s will. And He’s allowed me to go up to the
mountain, and I’ve looked over, and I’ve seen the promised land. I may
not get there with you. But I want you to know tonight, that we, as a
people will get to the promised land.”
The speech left him revitalized and in a good mood. The next day he
expressed some concern about an upcoming march that could turn
violent but said fear should not stop them from proceeding. “I’d rather
be dead than afraid,” he told an aide. That evening, he dressed and
prepared for a dinner at a restaurant with his aides, and running late,
he finally appeared on the balcony outside his motel room when a rifle
shot rang out and a single bullet pierced his neck. He died within an
hour.
• • •
Interpretation: Martin Luther King Jr. was a complex man with
several sides to his character. There was the pleasure-loving King, who
loved nice clothes, food, dances, women, and mischievous behavior.
There was the practical King, always wanting to solve people’s
problems and think things through thoroughly. There was the
sensitive, introspective King, a side that increasingly inclined him
toward spiritual pursuits. These sides were often in conflict from
within, as he succumbed to passing moods. This was what often caused
him to agonize over decisions. Associates would often be troubled by
how deeply he considered his options and how often he doubted
himself, imagining that he was not worthy of the role that he had been
called upon to play.
His relationship to his father reflected this complexity. On the one
hand, he truly loved and respected him, enough to consider becoming
a minister and emulating his style of leadership. On the other hand, he
became aware from a very early age of the dangers that would ensue if
he allowed himself to be overwhelmed by his father’s dominating
presence. His younger brother, A.D. King, lacked such awareness, a
fact that caused him much pain in his life. A.D. became a minister, but
he never could assert his independence. His career was erratic as he
moved from one church to another. He developed an alcohol problem
and later in life revealed a definite self-destructive streak that troubled
his older brother. A.D. lived in their father’s shadow.

[PAGE 405]
Something from deep within Martin Jr. impelled him to create
some distance and autonomy. This meant not mindlessly rebelling
against his father, which in the end would simply have revealed how
defined he had been by him in reverse. It meant understanding the
differences between them and using these differences as levers to
create space. It meant taking the best from his father—his discipline,
his high sense of principle, his caring nature. And it meant going his
own way when something from deep within urged him to do so. He
taught himself to listen to such intuitions, which led to his decision to
begin his public career in Montgomery and to accept the MIA
leadership position. In such moments, it was as if he could foresee his
destiny and drop his habit of overthinking things.
Then, a few weeks after becoming the MIA leader, as he began to
feel the increasing tension that went with the position, the many sides
of his character suddenly took over and led to an inner crisis. There
was the self-doubting King, the fearful King, the practical King
frustrated by the endless obstacles and infighting, the King who
yearned for a simpler and more pleasant life. This inner conflict
paralyzed him. And as all of that reached a peak the night he entered
his kitchen, suddenly those inclinations and intuitions that had guided
him before in his life transformed into an actual voice, the voice of
God, clarifying his destiny and offering continual support. He could
hear this voice so clearly from within that it would echo and
reverberate throughout his life.
From then on, in conversations and speeches, he would continually
refer to this “voice” that now guided him. And with this voice the
doubts, fears, and debilitating inner conflicts would disappear. He
could feel integrated on a whole new level. Certainly the moods and
anxieties would return, but so would the voice, making his mission
clear to him.
People were often surprised, and sometimes perturbed, by how
strategic he had become as his leadership role expanded to a national
level. During and after every civil rights campaign, he would conduct
deep analysis of the actions and reactions of the other side, learning
lessons and honing tactics. For some, this did not square with his
position as a spiritual leader—for instance, his decision to use children
and teenagers in Birmingham as a means to fill the city jails. Ministers
were not supposed to think like that. But to King, such pragmatism
was intimately connected to his mission. To merely inspire people with

[PAGE 406]
speeches was sentimental, and he hated that. To not think deeply
about results was to merely seek attention for appearing righteous, and
to gratify the ego. He wanted to effect change, to dramatically and
palpably alter the conditions of blacks in the South.
And so he came to understand that the game was about gaining
leverage against the whites in power, who resisted change at every
step. He had to use sit-ins and boycotts to maximize the pain they felt,
even during the negotiating process. He had to maximize the attention
from the press and bring into the living rooms of white America the
ugly reality of life in the South for blacks. His strategic objective was
their conscience. He had to keep the movement unified in the face of
the increasing desire for violence among younger blacks. And as the
voice reminded him of his ultimate purpose, to stand up for and bring
about real justice, he naturally felt compelled to widen the struggle into
a mass civil disobedience campaign.
In a sense, King would serve as the voice for black America,
assuming a role similar to that of the voice that had guided him. He
would strive to bring unity to the cause and keep the movement
focused on practical results instead of debilitating infighting.
His bouts of depression, which became more intense in the later
years, stemmed from his deep sensitivity not only to the people around
him (the envy and continual criticisms he faced) but to the zeitgeist.
Before others did, he sensed the mood in America, the grim reality of
the war in Vietnam, the despair in the inner cities, the restlessness of
the young and their hunger to escape reality through drugs, the
cowardice of the political leadership. He linked this with his own sense
of doom—he knew he would be assassinated. Such moods would
overwhelm him. But the voice he had heard so many years before in
Montgomery allowed him to squelch his fears and rise above the
depression. Whenever he felt connected to his mission and purpose in
life, he would experience a profound sense of fulfillment. He was doing
what he was called to do, and he would not have traded this life for any
other. In his last days, the connection grew deeper: he would bring
change to the people of Memphis, but his fate would cut this short.
Understand: In many ways, the dilemma that King faced is the
dilemma that all of us face in life, because of a profound element in
human nature. We are all complex. We like to present a front to the
world that is consistent and mature, but we know inside that we are

[PAGE 407]
subject to many different moods and wear many different faces,
depending on circumstances. We can be practical, social, introspective,
irrational, depending on the mood of the moment. And this inner
chaos actually causes us pain. We lack a sense of cohesion and
direction in life. We could choose any number of paths, depending on
our shifting emotions, which pull us this way and that. Why go here
instead of there? We wander through life, never quite reaching the
goals that we feel are so important to us, or realizing our potential. The
moments in which we feel clarity and purpose are fleeting. To soothe
the pain from our aimlessness, we might enmesh ourselves in various
addictions, pursue new forms of pleasure, or give ourselves over to
some cause that interests us for a few months or weeks.
The only solution to the dilemma is King’s solution—to find a higher
sense of purpose, a mission that will provide us our own direction, not
that of our parents, friends, or peers. This mission is intimately
connected to our individuality, to what makes us unique. As King
expressed it: “We have a responsibility to set out to discover what we
are made for, to discover our life’s work, to discover what we are called
to do. And after we discover that, we should set out to do it with all the
strength and all of the power that we can muster.” This “life’s work” is
what we were intended to do, as dictated by our particular skills, gifts,
and inclinations. It is our calling in life. For King, it was an impulse to
find his own particular path, to fuse the practical with the spiritual.
Finding this higher sense of purpose gives us the integration and
direction we all crave.
Consider this “life’s work” something that speaks to you from within
—a voice. This voice will often warn you when you are getting involved
in unnecessary entanglements or when you are about to follow career
paths that are unsuited to your character, by the uneasiness that you
feel. It directs you toward activities and goals that mesh with your
nature. When you are listening to it, you feel like you have greater
clarity and wholeness. If you listen closely enough, it will direct you
toward your particular destiny. It can be seen as something spiritual or
something personal, or both.
It is not the voice of your ego, which wants attention and quick
gratification, something that further divides you from within. Rather, it
absorbs you in your work and what you have to do. It is sometimes
hard to hear, as your head is full of the voices of others telling you what
you should and should not do. Hearing it involves introspection, effort,

[PAGE 408]
and practice. When you follow its guidance, positive things tend to
happen. You have the inner strength to do what you must and not be
swayed by other people, who have their own agendas. Hearing this
voice will connect you to your larger goals and help you avoid detours.
It will make you more strategic, focused, and adaptive. Once you hear
it and understand your purpose, there will be no going back. Your
course has been set, and deviating from it will cause anxiety and pain.
He who has a why to live can bear with almost any how.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
Keys to Human Nature
In the world today, we humans face a particular predicament: As soon
as our schooling ends, we suddenly find ourselves thrown into the
work world, where people can be ruthless and the competition is fierce.
Only a few years before, if we were lucky, our parents met many of our
needs and were there to guide us; in some cases, they were
overprotective. Now we find ourselves on our own, with little or no life
experience to rely upon. We have to make decisions and choices that
will affect our entire future.
In the not-so-distant past, people’s career and life choices were
somewhat limited. They would settle into the particular jobs or roles
available to them and stay there for decades. Certain older figures—
mentors, family members, religious leaders—could offer some
direction if needed. But such stability and help is hard to find today, as
the world changes ever more quickly. Everyone is caught up in the
harsh struggle to make it; people have never been so preoccupied with
their own needs and agendas. The advice of our parents might be
totally antiquated in this new order. Facing this unprecedented state of
affairs, we tend to react in one of two ways.
Some of us, excited by all the changes, actually embrace this new
order. We are young and full of energy. The smorgasbord of
opportunities offered by the digital world dazzles us. We can
experiment, try many different jobs, have many different relationships
and adventures. Commitments to a single career or person feel like
unnecessary restrictions on this freedom. Obeying orders and listening
to authority figures is old-fashioned. Better to explore, have fun, and
be open. A time will come when we will figure out what exactly to do

[PAGE 409]
with our lives. In the meantime, maintaining the freedom to do as we
wish and go where we please becomes our main motivation.
Some of us, however, react the opposite way: Frightened of the
chaos, we quickly opt for a career that is practical and lucrative,
hopefully related to some of our interests, but not necessarily. We
settle on an intimate relationship. We may even continue to cling to
our parents. What motivates us is to somehow establish the stability
that is so hard to find in this world.
Both paths, however, tend to lead to some problems further down
the road. In the first case, trying so many things out, we never really
develop solid skills in one particular area. We find it hard to focus on a
specific activity for too long because we are so used to flitting around
and distracting ourselves, which makes it doubly hard to learn new
skills if we want to. Because of this our career possibilities begin to
narrow. We become trapped into moving from one job to another. We
might now want a relationship that lasts, but we haven’t developed the
tolerance for compromise, and we cannot help but bristle at the
restrictions to our freedom that a lasting relationship will represent.
Although we might not like to admit it to ourselves, our freedom can
begin to wear on us.
In the second case, the career we committed to in our twenties
might begin to feel a bit lifeless in our thirties. We chose it for practical
purposes, and it has little connection to what actually interests us in
life. It begins to feel like just a job. Our minds disengage from the
work. And now that smorgasbord of opportunities in the modern world
begins to tempt us as we reach midlife. Perhaps we need some new,
exciting career or relationship or adventure.
In either case, we do what we can to manage our frustrations. But as
the years go by, we start to experience bouts of pain that we cannot
deny or repress. We are generally unaware of the source of our
discomfort—the lack of purpose and true direction in our lives.
This pain comes in several forms.
We feel increasingly bored. Not really engaged in our work, we turn
to various distractions to occupy our restless minds. But by the law of
diminishing returns, we need to continually find new and stronger
forms of diversion—the latest trend in entertainment, travel to an
exotic location, a new guru or cause to follow, hobbies that are taken

[PAGE 410]
up and abandoned quickly, addictions of all kinds. Only when we are
alone or in down moments do we actually experience the chronic
boredom that motivates many of our actions and eats away at us.
We feel increasingly insecure. We all have dreams and a sense of
our own potential. If we have wandered aimlessly through life or gone
astray, we begin to become aware of the discrepancy between our
dreams and reality. We have no solid accomplishments. We feel
envious of those who do. Our ego becomes brittle, placing us in a trap.
We are too fragile to take criticism. Learning requires an admission
that we don’t know things and need to improve, but we feel too
insecure to admit this, and so our ideas become set and our skills
stagnate. We cover this up with an air of certainty and strong opinions,
or moral superiority, but the underlying insecurity cannot be shaken.
We often feel anxious and stressed but are never quite certain as to
why. Life involves inevitable obstacles and difficulties, but we have
spent much of our time trying to avoid anything painful. Perhaps we
didn’t take on responsibilities that would open us to failure. We
steered clear of tough choices and stressful situations. But then they
crop up in the present—we are forced to finish something by a
deadline, or we suddenly become ambitious and want to realize a
dream of ours. We have not learned in the past how to handle such
situations, and the anxiety and stress overwhelm us. Our avoidance
leads to a low-grade, continual anxiety.
And finally, we feel depressed. All of us want to believe that there is
some purpose and meaning to our life, that we are connected to
something larger than ourselves. We want to feel some weight and
significance to what we have done. Without that conviction, we
experience an emptiness and depression that we will ascribe to other
factors.
Understand: This feeling of being lost and confused is not
anyone’s fault. It is a natural reaction to having been born into times of
great change and chaos. The old support systems of the past—religions,
universal causes to believe in, social cohesion—have mostly
disappeared, at least in the Western world. Disappearing also are the
elaborate conventions, rules, and taboos that once channeled behavior.
We are all cast adrift, and it is no wonder that so many people lose
themselves in addictions and depression.

[PAGE 411]
The problem here is simple: By our nature we humans crave a sense
of direction. Other living organisms rely upon elaborate instincts to
guide and determine their behavior. We have come to depend upon
our consciousness. But the human mind is a bottomless pit—it
provides us with endless mental spaces to explore. Our imagination
can take us anywhere and conjure up anything. At any moment, we
could choose to go in a hundred different directions. Without belief
systems or conventions in place, we seem to have no obvious compass
points to guide our behavior and decisions, and this can be maddening.
Fortunately there is one way out of this predicament, and it is by
nature available to each and every one of us. There is no need to look
for gurus or to grow nostalgic for the past and its certainties. A
compass and guidance system does exist. It comes from looking for
and discovering the individual purpose to our lives. It is the path taken
by the greatest achievers and contributors to the advancement of
human culture, and we only have to see the path to take it. Here’s how
it works.
Each human individual is radically unique. This uniqueness is
inscribed in us in three ways—the one-of-a-kind configuration of our
DNA, the particular way our brains are wired, and our experiences as
we go through life, experiences that are unlike any other’s. Consider
this uniqueness as a seed that is planted at birth, with potential
growth. And this uniqueness has a purpose.
In nature, in a thriving ecosystem we can observe a high level of
diversity among species. With these diverse species operating in a
balance, the system is rich and feeds off itself, creating newer species
and more interrelationships. Ecosystems with little diversity are rather
barren, and their health is much more tenuous. We humans operate in
our own cultural ecosystem. Throughout history we can see that the
healthiest and most celebrated cultures have been the ones that
encouraged and exploited the greatest internal diversity among
individuals—ancient Athens, the Chinese Sung Dynasty, the Italian
Renaissance, the 1920s in the Western world, to name a few. These
were periods of tremendous creativity, high points in history. We can
contrast this with the conformity and cultural sterility in dictatorships.
By bringing our uniqueness to flower in the course of our life,
through our particular skills and the specific nature of our work, we
contribute our share to this needed diversity. This uniqueness actually

[PAGE 412]
transcends our individual existence. It is stamped upon us by nature
itself. How can we explain why we are drawn to music, or to helping
other people, or to particular forms of knowledge? We have inherited
it, and it is there for a purpose.
Striving to connect to and cultivate this uniqueness provides us a
path to follow, an internal guidance system through life. But
connecting to this system does not come easily. Normally the signs of
our uniqueness are clearer to us in early childhood. We found
ourselves naturally drawn to particular subjects or activities, despite
the influence of our parents. We can call these primal inclinations.
They speak to us, like a voice. But as we get older, that voice becomes
drowned out by parents, peers, teachers, the culture at large. We are
told what to like, what is cool, what is not cool. We start to lose a sense
of who we are, what makes us different. We choose career paths
unsuited to our nature.
To tap into the guidance system, we must make the connection to
our uniqueness as strong as possible, and learn to trust that voice. (For
more on this, see “Discover your calling in life” in the next section.) To
the degree we manage to do so, we are richly rewarded. We have a
sense of direction, in the form of an overall career path that meshes
with our particular inclinations. We have a calling. We know which
skills we need and want to develop. We have goals and subgoals. When
we take detours from our path or become involved in entanglements
that distract us from our goals, we feel uncomfortable and quickly get
back on course. We may explore and have adventures, as is natural for
us when we are young, but there is a relative direction to our exploring
that frees us from continual doubts and distractions.
This path does not require that we follow one simple line, or that
our inclinations be narrowly focused. Perhaps we feel the pull of
several types of knowledge. Our path involves mastering a variety of
skills and combining them in highly inventive and creative ways. This
was the genius of Leonardo da Vinci, who combined his interests in
art, science, architecture, and engineering, having mastered each one
of them. This way of following the path goes well with our modern,
eclectic tastes and our love of wide exploration.
When we engage this internal guidance system, all of the negative
emotions that plague us in our aimlessness are neutralized and even
turned around into positive ones. For instance, we may feel boredom

[PAGE 413]
in the process of accumulating skills. Practice can be tedious. But we
can embrace the tedium, knowing of the tremendous benefits to come.
We are learning something that excites us. We do not crave constant
distractions. Our minds are pleasantly absorbed in the work. We
develop the ability to focus deeply, and with such focus comes
momentum. We retain what we absorb because we are engaged
emotionally in learning. We then learn at a faster rate, which leads to
creative energy. With a mind teeming with fresh information, ideas
begin to come to us out of nowhere. Reaching such creative levels is
intensely satisfying, and it becomes ever easier to add new skills to our
repertoire.
With a sense of purpose, we feel much less insecure. We have an
overall sense that we are advancing, realizing some or all of our
potential. We can begin to look back at various accomplishments,
small or large. We got things done. We may have moments of doubt,
but they are generally related more to the quality of our work than to
our self-worth—did we do our best job? Focusing more on the work
itself and its quality than on what people think of us, we can
distinguish between practical and malicious criticism. We have an
inner resiliency, which helps us bounce back from failures and learn
from them. We know who we are, and this self-awareness becomes our
anchor in life.
With this guidance system in place, we can turn anxiety and stress
into productive emotions. In trying to reach our goals—a book, a
business, winning a political campaign—we have to manage a great
deal of anxiety and uncertainty, making daily decisions on what to do.
In the process, we learn to control our levels of anxiety—if we think too
much about how far we have to go, we might feel overwhelmed.
Instead we learn to focus on smaller goals along the way, while also
retaining a degree of urgency. We develop the ability to regulate our
anxiety—enough to keep us going and keep improving the work, but
not so much as to paralyze us. This is an important life skill.
We develop a high tolerance for stress as well, and even feed off of
it. We humans are actually built to handle stress. Our restless and
energetic minds thrive best when we are mentally and physically
active, our adrenaline pumping. It is a known phenomenon that people
tend to age more quickly and deteriorate more rapidly right after they
retire. Their minds have nothing to feed on. Anxious thoughts return.

[PAGE 414]
They become less active. Maintaining some stress and tension, and
knowing how to handle it, can improve our health.
And finally, with a sense of purpose we are less prone to depression.
Yes, low moments are inevitable, even welcome. They make us
withdraw and reassess ourselves, as they did for King. But more often
we feel excited and lifted above the pettiness that so often marks daily
life in the modern world. We are on a mission. We are realizing our
life’s work. We are contributing to something much larger than
ourselves, and this ennobles us. We have moments of great fulfillment
that sustain us. Even death can lose its sting. What we have
accomplished will outlive us, and we do not have that debilitating
feeling of having wasted our potential.
Think of it this way: In military history, we can identify two types of
armies—those that fight for a cause or an idea, and those that fight
largely for money, as part of a job. Those that go to war for a cause,
such as the armies of Napoleon Bonaparte fighting to spread the
French Revolution, fight with greater intensity. They tie their
individual fate to that of the cause and the nation. They are more
willing to die in battle for the cause. Those in the army who are less
enthusiastic get swept up in the group spirit. The general can ask more
of his soldiers. The battalions are more unified, and the various
battalion leaders are more creative. Fighting for a cause is known as a
force multiplier—the greater the connection to the cause, the higher
the morale, which translates into greater force. Such an army can often
defeat one that is much larger but less motivated.
We can say something similar about your life: operating with a high
sense of purpose is a force multiplier. All of your decisions and actions
have greater power behind them because they are guided by a central
idea and purpose. The many sides to your character are channeled into
this purpose, giving you more sustained energy. Your focus and your
ability to bounce back from adversity give you ineluctable momentum.
You can ask more of yourself. And in a world where so many people are
meandering, you will spring past them with ease and attract attention
for this. People will want to be around you to imbibe your spirit.
Your task as a student of human nature is twofold: First, you must
become aware of the primary role that a sense of purpose plays in
human life. By our nature, the need for purpose has a gravitational pull
to it that no one can resist. Look at the people around you and gauge

[PAGE 415]
what is guiding their behavior, seeing patterns in their choices. Is the
freedom to do what they please their primary motivation? Are they
mostly after pleasure, money, attention, power for its own sake, or a
cause to join? These are what we shall call false purposes, and they
lead to obsessive behavior and various dead ends. (For more on false
purposes, see the last section of this chapter.) Once you identify people
as motivated by a false purpose, you should avoid hiring or working
with them, as they will tend to draw you downward with their
unproductive energy.
You will also notice some people who are struggling to find their
purpose in the form of their calling in life. Perhaps you can help them
or you can help each other. And finally, you may recognize a few
people who have a relatively high sense of purpose. This could be
someone young who seems destined for greatness. You will want to
befriend them and become infected with their enthusiasm. Others will
be older, with a string of accomplishments to their name. You will want
to associate with them in any way possible. They will draw you upward.
Your second task is to find your sense of purpose and elevate it by
making the connection to it as deep as possible. (See the next section
for more on this.) If you are young, use what you find to give an overall
framework to your restless energy. Explore the world freely,
accumulate adventures, but all within a certain framework. Most
important, accumulate skills. If you are older and have gone astray,
take the skills you have acquired and find ways to gently channel them
in the direction that will eventually mesh with your inclinations and
spirit. Avoid sudden and drastic career changes that are impractical.
Keep in mind that your contribution to the culture can come in
many forms. You don’t have to become an entrepreneur or figure
largely on the world’s stage. You can do just as well operating as one
person in a group or organization, as long as you retain a strong point
of view that is your own and use this to gently exert your influence.
Your path can involve physical labor and craft—you take pride in the
excellence of the work, leaving your particular stamp on the quality. It
can be raising a family in the best way possible. No calling is superior
to another. What matters is that it be tied to a personal need and
inclination, and that your energy move you toward improvement and
continual learning from experience.

[PAGE 416]
In any event, you will want to go as far as you can in cultivating your
uniqueness and the originality that goes with it. In a world full of
people who seem largely interchangeable, you cannot be replaced. You
are one of a kind. Your combination of skills and experience is not
replicable. That represents true freedom and the ultimate power we
humans can possess.
Strategies for Developing a High Sense of Purpose
Once you commit yourself to developing or strengthening your sense of
purpose, then the hard work begins. You will face many enemies and
obstacles impeding your progress—the distracting voices of others who
instill doubts about your calling and your uniqueness; your own
boredom and frustrations with the work itself and your slow progress;
the lack of trustworthy criticism from people to help you; the levels of
anxiety you must manage; and finally, the burnout that often
accompanies focused labor over long periods. The following five
strategies are designed to help you move past these obstacles. They are
in a loose order, the first being the essential starting point. You will
want to put them all into practice to ensure continual movement
forward.
Discover your calling in life. You begin this strategy by looking for signs
of primal inclinations in your earliest years, when they were often the
clearest. Some people can easily remember such early indications, but
for many of us it requires some introspection and some digging. What
you are looking for is moments in which you were unusually fascinated
by a particular subject, or certain objects, or specific activities and
forms of play.
The great nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century scientist Marie
Curie could distinctly recall the moment when she was four years old
and entered her father’s office, suddenly mesmerized by the sight of all
sorts of tubes and measuring devices for various chemistry
experiments placed behind a polished glass case. Her whole life she
would feel a similar visceral thrill whenever she entered a laboratory.
For Anton Chekhov, it was attending his first play in a theater as a boy
in his small town. The whole atmosphere of make-believe thrilled him.
For Steve Jobs, it was passing an electronics store as a child and seeing
the wondrous gadgets in the window, marveling at their design and
complexity. For Tiger Woods, it was, at the age of two, watching his

[PAGE 417]
father hit golf balls into a net in the garage and being unable to contain
his excitement and desire to imitate him. For the writer Jean-Paul
Sartre, it was a childhood fascination with printed words on a page,
and the possible magical meanings each word possessed.
These moments of visceral attraction occurred suddenly and
without any prodding from parents or friends. It would be hard to put
into words why they occurred; they are signs of something beyond our
personal control. The actress Ingrid Bergman expressed it best, when
talking of the fascination she had with performing in front of her
father’s movie camera at a very early age: “I didn’t choose acting. It
chose me.”
Sometimes these moments can come when we are older, as when
Martin Luther King Jr. realized his mission in life as he got pulled into
the Montgomery bus boycott. And sometimes they can occur while
observing other people who are masters in their field.
As a young man, the future Japanese film director Akira Kurosawa
felt particularly aimless. He tried painting, then apprenticed as an
assistant director on films, a job he hated. He was ready to quit when
he got assigned to work for the director Kajiro Yamamoto in 1936.
Watching this great master at work, suddenly his eyes were opened to
the magical possibilities of film, and he realized his calling. As he later
described this, “It was like the wind in a mountain pass blowing across
my face. By this I mean that wonderfully refreshing wind you feel after
a painfully hard climb. The breath of that wind tells you you are
reaching the pass. Then you stand in the pass and look down over the
panorama as it opens up. When I stood behind Yama-san in his
director’s chair next to the camera, I felt my heart swell with that same
feeling—‘I’ve made it at last.’”
As another sign, examine moments in your life when certain tasks
or activities felt natural and easy to you, similar to swimming with a
current. In performing such activities, you have a greater tolerance for
the tedium of practicing. People’s criticisms don’t discourage you so
easily; you want to learn. You can contrast this with other subjects or
tasks that you find deeply boring and unfulfilling, which frustrate you.
Related to this, you will want to figure out the particular form of
intelligence that your brain is wired for. In his book Frames of Mind,
the psychologist Howard Gardner lists certain forms of intelligence for
which people usually have one particular gift or affinity. This could be

[PAGE 418]
mathematics and logic, physical activity, words, images, or music. We
could also add to this social intelligence, a superior sensitivity to
people. When you are engaged in the activity that feels right, it will
correspond to that form of intelligence for which your brain is most
suited.
From these various factors you should be able to spot the outline of
your calling. In essence, in going through this process you are
discovering yourself, what makes you different, what predates the
opinions of others. You are reacquainting yourself with your natural
likes and dislikes. Later in life we often lose contact with our own
preferences for things, deeply influenced by what others are doing and
by the culture. You are subtracting such external influences. The
deeper you make this connection to your calling, the more you will be
able to resist the bad ideas of others. You will engage that internal
guidance system. Put some time into the process, working with a
journal if necessary. You are developing the habit of assessing and
listening to yourself, so that you can continually monitor your progress
and adjust this calling to the various stages in your life.
If you are young and just starting out in your career, you will want
to explore a relatively wide field related to your inclinations—for
instance, if your affinity is words and writing, try all the different types
of writing until you hit upon the right fit. If you are older and have
more experience, you will want to take the skills you have already
developed and find a way to adapt them more in the direction of your
true calling. Remember that the calling could be combining several
fields that fascinate you. For Jobs, it was the intersection of technology
and design. Keep the process open-ended; your experience will instruct
you as to the way.
Do not try to bypass the work of discovering your calling or imagine
that it will simply come to you naturally. Although it may come to a few
people early in life or in a lightning-bolt moment, for most of us it
requires continual introspection and effort. Experimenting with the
skills and options related to your personality and inclinations is not
only the single most essential step in developing a high sense of
purpose, it is perhaps the most important step in life in general.
Knowing in a deep way who you are, your uniqueness, will make it that
much easier to avoid all of the other pitfalls of human nature.

[PAGE 419]
Use resistance and negative spurs. The key to success in any field is first
developing skills in various areas, which you can later combine in
unique and creative ways. But the process of doing so can be tedious
and painful, as you become aware of your limitations and relative lack
of skill. Most people, consciously or unconsciously, seek to avoid
tedium, pain, and any form of adversity. They try to put themselves in
places where they will face less criticism and minimize their chances of
failure. You must choose to move in the opposite direction. You want
to embrace negative experiences, limitations, and even pain as the
perfect means of building up your skill levels and sharpening your
sense of purpose.
When it comes to exercise, you understand the importance of
manageable levels of pain and discomfort, because they later yield
strength, stamina, and other positive sensations. The same will come
to you by actually embracing the tedium in your practice. Frustration is
a sign that you are making progress as your mind becomes aware of
higher levels of skill that you have yet to attain.
You want to use and embrace any kind of deadline. If you give
yourself a year to finish a project or start up a business, you will
generally take a year or more. If you give yourself three months, you
will finish it that much sooner, and the concentrated energy with which
you work will raise your skill level and make the end result that much
better. If necessary, manufacture reasonably tight deadlines to
intensify your sense of purpose.
Thomas Edison knew he could take far too long to realize his
inventions, and so he developed the habit of talking about their future
greatness to journalists, overselling his ideas. With publicity, he would
now be put in the position of having to make it happen, and relatively
soon, or be ridiculed. He would now have to rise to the occasion, and
he almost always did. The great eighteenth-century Zen master Hakuin
took this further. He became greatly frustrated by the particular koans
(paradoxical anecdotes designed to spark enlightenment) presented to
him by his master. His lack of progress made him feel desperate, so he
told himself, in all seriousness, “If I fail to master one of these koans in
seven days, I will kill myself.” This worked for him and kept on
working for him, until he attained total enlightenment.
As you progress on your path, you will be subject to more and more
of people’s criticisms. Some of them might be constructive and worth

[PAGE 420]
paying attention to, but many of them come from envy. You can
recognize the latter by the person’s emotional tone in expressing their
negative opinions. They go a little too far, speak with a bit too much
vehemence; they make it personal, instilling doubts about your overall
ability, emphasizing your personality more than the work; they lack
specific details about what and how to improve. Once recognized, the
trick is not to internalize these criticisms in any form. Becoming
defensive is a sign they have gotten to you. Instead, use their negative
opinions to motivate you and add to your sense of purpose.
Absorb purposeful energy. We humans are extremely susceptible to the
moods and energy of other people. For this reason, you want to avoid
too much contact with those who have a low or false sense of purpose.
On the other hand, you always want to try to find and associate with
those who have a high sense of purpose. This could be the perfect
mentor or teacher or partner on a project. Such people will tend to
bring out the best in you, and you will find it easier and even refreshing
to receive their criticisms.
This was the strategy that brought Coco Chanel (see chapter 5) so
much power. She began life from a position of great weakness—an
orphan with little or no resources in life. She realized in her early
twenties that her calling was to design clothes and to start her own
apparel line. She desperately needed guidance, however, particularly
when it came to the business side. She looked for people who could
help her find her way. At the age of twenty-five she met the perfect
target, a wealthy older English businessman named Arthur “Boy”
Capel. She was attracted to his ambition, his well-rounded experience,
his knowledge of the arts, and his ruthless practicality.
She latched onto him with great vehemence. He was able to instill in
her the confidence that she could become a famous designer. He
taught her about business in general. He offered her tough criticisms
that she could accept because of her deep respect for him. He helped
guide her in her first important decisions in setting up her business.
From him she developed a very honed sense of purpose that she
retained her entire life. Without his influence, her path would have
been too confusing and difficult. Later in life, she kept returning to this
strategy. She found other men and women who had skills she lacked or
needed to strengthen—social graciousness, marketing, a nose for
cultural trends—and developed relationships that allowed her to learn
from them.

[PAGE 421]
In this case, you want to find people who are pragmatic and not
merely those who are charismatic or visionaries. You want their
practical advice, and to absorb their spirit of getting things done. If
possible, collect around you a group of people from different fields, as
friends or associates, who have similar energy. You will help elevate
one another’s sense of purpose. Do not settle for virtual associations or
mentors. They will not have the same effect.
Create a ladder of descending goals. Operating with long-term goals will
bring you tremendous clarity and resolve. These goals—a project or
business to create, for instance—can be relatively ambitious, enough to
bring out the best in you. The problem, however, is that they will also
tend to generate anxiety as you look at all you have to do to reach them
from the present vantage point. To manage such anxiety, you must
create a ladder of smaller goals along the way, reaching down to the
present. Such objectives are simpler the further down the ladder you
go, and you can realize them in relatively short time frames, giving you
moments of satisfaction and a sense of progress. Always break tasks
into smaller bites. Each day or week you must have microgoals. This
will help you focus and avoid entanglements or detours that will waste
your energy.
At the same time, you want to continually remind yourself of the
larger goal, to avoid losing track of it or getting too mired in details.
Periodically return to your original vision and imagine the immense
satisfaction you will have when it comes to fruition. This will give you
clarity and inspire you forward. You will also want a degree of
flexibility built into the process. At certain moments you reassess your
progress and adjust the various goals as necessary, constantly learning
from experience and adapting and improving your original objective.
Remember that what you are after is a series of practical results and
accomplishments, not a list of unrealized dreams and aborted projects.
Working with smaller, embedded goals will keep you moving in such a
direction.
Lose yourself in the work. Perhaps the greatest difficulty you will face
in maintaining a high and consistent sense of purpose is the level of
commitment that is required over time and the sacrifices that go with
this. You have to handle many moments of frustration, boredom, and
failure, and the endless temptations in our culture for more immediate

[PAGE 422]
pleasures. The benefits listed above in the Keys are often not
immediately apparent. And as the years pile up, you can face burnout.
To offset this tedium, you need to have moments of flow in which
your mind becomes so deeply immersed in the work that you are
transported beyond your ego. You experience feelings of profound
calmness and joy. The psychologist Abraham Maslow called these
“peak experiences”—once you have them, you are forever changed. You
will feel the compulsion to repeat them. The more immediate pleasures
the world offers will pale in comparison. And when you feel rewarded
for your dedication and sacrifices, your sense of purpose will be
intensified.
These experiences cannot be manufactured, but you can set the
stage for them and vastly increase your odds. First, it is essential to
wait until you are further along in the process—at least more than
halfway through a project, or after several years of study in your field.
At such moments, your mind will be naturally filled with all kinds of
information and practice, ripe for a peak experience.
Second, you must plan on giving yourself uninterrupted time with
the work—as many hours in the day as possible, and as many days in
the week. For this purpose, you have to rigorously eliminate the usual
level of distractions, even plan on disappearing for a period of time.
Think of it as a type of religious retreat. Steve Jobs would close the
door to his office, spend the entire day holed up in the room, and wait
until he fell into a state of deep focus. Once you become adept at this,
you can do it almost anywhere. Einstein would notoriously go into
such a deep state of absorption that he would lose himself in the city
streets or while sailing on a lake.
Third, the emphasis must be on the work, never on yourself or the
desire for recognition. You are fusing your mind with the work itself,
and any intrusive thoughts from your ego or doubts about yourself or
personal obsessions will interrupt the flow. Not only will you find this
flow immensely therapeutic, but it will also yield uncannily creative
results.
For the time period that the actress Ingrid Bergman was engaged in
a particular film project, she poured every ounce of her energy into it,
forgetting everything else about her life. Unlike other actors, who gave
greater importance to the money they earned or the attention they
received, Bergman saw only the opportunity to completely embody the

[PAGE 423]
role she was to play and bring it to life. For this purpose, she would
engage with the writers and the director involved, actively altering the
role itself and some of the dialogue, making it more real; they would
trust her in this, because her ideas were almost always excellent and
were based on deep thinking about the character.
Once she had gone far enough in the writing and thinking process,
she would go through days or weeks feeling herself fuse with the role,
and not interacting with others. In doing so, she could forget about all
the pain in her life—the loss of her parents when she was young, her
abusive husband. These were the moments of genuine joy in her life,
and she translated such peak experiences to the screen. Audiences
could sense something profoundly realistic in her performances, and
they identified unusually intensely with the characters she played.
Knowing she would periodically have such experiences, and the results
that went with them, kept her moving past the pain and sacrifices that
she demanded of herself.
Look at this as a form of religious devotion to your life’s work. Such
devotion will eventually yield moments of union with the work itself,
and a type of ecstasy that is impossible to verbalize until you have
experienced it.
The Lure of False Purposes
The gravitational pull we feel toward finding a purpose comes from
two elements in human nature. First, unable to rely on instincts as
other animals do, we require some means of having a sense of
direction, a way to guide and restrict our behavior. Second, we humans
are aware of our puniness as individuals in a world with billions of
others in a vast universe. We are aware of our mortality, and how we
will eventually be swallowed up in the eternity of time. We need to feel
larger than just the individuals we are, and connected to something
that transcends us.
Human nature being what it is, however, many people seek to
create purpose and a feeling of transcendence on the cheap, to find it
in the easiest and most accessible way, with the least amount of effort.
Such people give themselves over to false purposes, those that merely
supply the illusion of purpose and transcendence. We can contrast
them with real purposes in the following way: The real purpose comes

[PAGE 424]
from within. It is an idea, a calling, a sense of mission that we feel
personally and intimately connected to. It is our own; we may have
been inspired by others, but nobody imposed it upon us and nobody
can take it away. If we are religious, we don’t merely accept the
orthodoxy; we go through rigorous introspection and make our belief
inward, true to ourselves. False purposes come from external sources—
belief systems that we swallow whole, conformity to what other people
are doing.
The real purpose leads us upward, to a more human level. We
improve our skills and sharpen our minds; we realize our potential and
contribute to society. False purposes lead downward, to the animal
side of our nature—to addictions, loss of mental powers, mindless
conformity, and cynicism.
It is critical that we become aware of these false forms of purpose.
Inevitably all of us at some point in our lives fall for them because they
are so easy, popular, and cheap. If we can eliminate the impulse
toward these lower forms, we will naturally gravitate toward the
higher, in our unavoidable search for meaning and purpose. Here are
five of the most common forms of false purposes that have appealed to
humans since the beginning of civilization.
The pursuit of pleasure: For many of us, work is just an irritating
necessity of life. What really motivates us is avoiding pain, and finding
as much pleasure as possible in our time outside work. The pleasures
we pursue can take various forms—sex, stimulants, entertainment,
eating, shopping, gambling, technological fads, games of all sorts.
No matter the objects of the pursuit, they tend to lead to a dynamic
of diminishing returns. The moments of pleasure we get tend to get
duller through repetition. We need either more and more of the same
or constantly new diversions. Our need often turns into an addiction,
and with the dependency comes a diminishing of health and mental
powers. We become possessed by the objects we crave and lose
ourselves. Under the influence of drugs or alcohol, for instance, we can
temporarily feel transported beyond the banality of our lives.
This form of false purpose is very common in the world today,
largely because of the cornucopia of distractions we can choose from.
But it goes against a basic element of human nature: to have deeper
levels of pleasure, we have to learn to limit ourselves. Reading a variety
of books for entertainment, in rapid succession, leads to a diminishing

[PAGE 425]
sense of satisfaction with each book; our minds are overwhelmed and
overstimulated; and we must reach for a new one right away. Reading
one excellent book and absorbing ourselves in it has a relaxing and
uplifting effect as we discover hidden riches within it. In the moments
when we are not reading, we think of the book again and again.
All of us require pleasurable moments outside work, ways to relieve
our tension. But when we operate with a sense of purpose, we know the
value of limiting ourselves, opting for depth of experience rather than
overstimulation.
Causes and cults: People have a profound need to believe in
something, and in the absence of great unifying belief systems, this
void is easily filled by all kinds of microcauses and cults. We notice that
such groups tend not to last very long. Within ten years they already
seem passé. During their brief existence, their adherents will substitute
extreme conviction and hyperbelief for a clear vision of what they are
after. For this purpose, enemies are quickly found and are said to be
the source of all that is wrong in the world. Such groups become the
means for people to vent their personal frustrations, envy, and hatred.
They also get to feel superior, as part of some clique with special access
to the truth.
We can recognize a microcause or cult by the vagueness of what its
disciples want. They cannot describe the kind of world or society they
desire in concrete, practical terms. Much of their raison d’être revolves
around negative definitions—get rid of these people or those practices
and the world will become a paradise. They have no sense of strategy
or defined ways of reaching their nebulous goals, which is a clear sign
that their group is merely about the release of emotions.
Often such groups will depend on large public gatherings in which
people can become intoxicated by numbers and shared feelings. Wily
rulers throughout history have used this to great effect. People in a
crowd are highly suggestible. Through short, simple phrases, with lots
of repetition, they can be made to chant back slogans and swallow the
most absurd and irrational ideas. In a crowd people can feel relieved of
any personal responsibility, which can lead to violence. They feel
transported beyond themselves and not so puny, but such enlargement
is an illusion. They are actually made smaller by losing their will and
their individual voice.

[PAGE 426]
Allying ourselves with a cause can be an important part of our sense
of purpose, as it was for Martin Luther King Jr. But it must emerge
from an internal process in which we have thought deeply about the
subject and are committing ourselves to the cause as part of our life’s
work. We are not simply a cog in the machinery of such a group but
active contributors, bringing our uniqueness into play and not
mimicking the company line. We are not joining out of a need to
gratify our ego or to vent ugly emotions, but rather out of a hunger for
justice and truth that springs from deep within our own sense of
purpose.
Money and success: For many people, the pursuit of money and status
can supply them with plenty of motivation and focus. Such types would
consider figuring out their calling in life a monumental waste of time
and an antiquated notion. But in the long run this philosophy often
yields the most impractical of results.
First, more often than not such types enter the field in which they
can make the most money the fastest. They aim for the biggest
paychecks. Their career choices have slight or no connection to their
actual inclinations. The fields they choose will tend to be crowded with
other insatiable hunters of money and success, and so the competition
is fierce. If they are zealous enough, they might do quite well for a
while, but as they get older, they begin to feel restless and ever so
slightly bored. They try different avenues for money and success; they
need new challenges. They have to keep finding ways to motivate
themselves. Often they make big mistakes in their obsessive pursuit of
money because their thinking is so short term, as we saw with those
who went all in on the derivatives frenzy leading up to the crash of
2008.
Second, money and success that last come from remaining original
and not mindlessly following the path that others are following. If we
make money our primary goal, we never truly cultivate our
uniqueness, and eventually someone younger and hungrier will
supplant us.
And finally, what often motivates people in this quest is to simply
have more money and status than other people, and to feel superior.
With that standard, it is difficult to know when they have enough,
because there are always people with more. And so the quest is endless
and exhausting. And since the connection to their work is not personal,

[PAGE 427]
such people become alienated from themselves; the pursuit feels
soulless; they are workaholics without a true calling. They may become
depressed or manic, and they will often lose what they have gained if
they become manic enough.
We all know the effects of “hyperintention”: If we want and need
desperately to sleep, we are less likely to fall asleep. If we absolutely
must give the best talk possible at some conference, we become
hyperanxious about the result, and the performance suffers. If we
desperately need to find an intimate partner or make friends, we are
more likely to push them away. If instead we relax and focus on other
things, we are more likely to fall asleep or give a great talk or charm
people. The most pleasurable things in life occur as a result of
something not directly intended and expected. When we try to
manufacture happy moments, they tend to disappoint us.
The same goes for the dogged pursuit of money and success. Many
of the most successful, famous, and wealthy individuals do not begin
with an obsession with money and status. One prime example would
be Steve Jobs, who amassed quite a fortune in his relatively short life.
He actually cared very little for material possessions. His singular
focus was on creating the best and most original designs, and when he
did so, good fortune followed him. Concentrate on maintaining a high
sense of purpose, and the success will flow to you naturally.
Attention: People have always pursued fame and attention as a way
to feel enlarged and more important. They become dependent on the
number of people applauding, the size of the army they command, the
crowd of courtiers that serve them. But this false sense of purpose has
become greatly democratized and widespread through social media.
Now almost any one of us can have the quantity of attention that past
kings and conquerors could only dream about. Our self-image and self-
esteem become tied to the attention we receive on a daily basis. In
social media, this often requires becoming increasingly outrageous to
capture eyeballs. It is an exhausting and alienating quest, as we
become more of a clown than anything else. And each moment that the
attention ebbs ever so slightly, a gnawing pain eats away at us: Are we
losing it? Who is siphoning off the flow of attention that was ours?
As with money and success, we have a much greater chance of
attracting attention by developing a high sense of purpose and creating
work that will naturally draw people to it. When the attention is

[PAGE 428]
unexpected, as with the success we suddenly have, it is all the more
pleasurable.
Cynicism: According to Friedrich Nietzsche, “Man would rather have
the void as purpose than be void of purpose.” Cynicism, the feeling that
there is no purpose or meaning in life, is what we shall call having “the
void as purpose.” In the world today, with growing disenchantment
with politics and the belief systems of the past, this form of the false
purpose is becoming increasingly common.
Such cynicism involves some or all of the following beliefs: Life is
absurd, meaningless, and random. Standards of truth, excellence, or
meaning are completely old-fashioned. Everything is relative. People’s
judgments are simply interpretations of the world, none better than
another. All politicians are corrupt, so it’s not really worth it to get
involved; better to abstain or choose a leader who will deliberately tear
it all down. People who are successful get there through gaming the
system. Any form of authority should be naturally mistrusted. Look
behind people’s motives and you will see that they are selfish. Reality is
quite brutal and ugly; better to accept this and be skeptical. It’s really
hard to take anything so seriously; we should just laugh and have a
good time. It’s all the same.
This attitude presents itself as cool and hip. Its adherents display a
somewhat apathetic and sardonic air that gives them the appearance
that they see through it all. But the attitude is not what it seems.
Behind it is the adolescent pose of appearing to not care, which
disguises a great fear of trying and failing, of standing out and being
ridiculed. It stems from sheer laziness and offers its believers
consolation for their lack of accomplishments.
As hunters for purpose and meaning, we want to move in the
opposite direction. Reality is not brutal and ugly—it contains much
that is sublime, beautiful, and worthy of wonder. We see this in the
great works of other achievers. We want to have more encounters with
the Sublime. Nothing is more awe-inspiring than the human brain
itself—its complexity, its untapped potential. We want to realize some
of that potential in our lives, not wallow in the cynical slacker attitude.
We see a purpose behind everything that we experience and see. In the
end, what we want is to fuse the curiosity and excitement we had
toward the world as children, when almost everything seemed
enchanting, with our adult intelligence.

[PAGE 429]
The whole law of human existence consists in nothing other than a man’s
always being able to bow before the immeasurably great. If people are
deprived of the immeasurably great, they will not live and will die in
despair. The immeasurable and infinite are as necessary for man as the
small planet he inhabits.
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky

[PAGE 430]
14
Resist the Downward Pull of the
Group
The Law of Conformity
We have a side to our character that we are generally unaware of
—our social personality, the different person we become when
we operate in groups of people. In the group setting, we
unconsciously imitate what others are saying and doing. We think
differently, more concerned with fitting in and believing what others
believe. We feel different emotions, infected by the group mood. We
are more prone to taking risks, to acting irrationally, because
everyone else is. This social personality can come to dominate who we
are. Listening so much to others and conforming our behavior to
them, we slowly lose a sense of our uniqueness and the ability to think
for ourselves. The only solution is to develop self-awareness and a
superior understanding of the changes that occur in us in groups.
With such intelligence, we can become superior social actors, able to
outwardly fit in and cooperate with others on a high level, while
retaining our independence and rationality.
An Experiment in Human Nature
As a young boy growing up in communist China, Gao Jianhua (b. 1952)
dreamed of becoming a great writer. He loved literature, and his
teachers commended him for his essays and poems. In 1964 he gained
admittance to the Yizhen Middle School (YMS), not far from where his
family lived. Located in the town of Yizhen, several hundred miles
north of Beijing, YMS was labeled a “key school”—over 90 percent of
its students went on to college. It was difficult to get into and quite
prestigious. At YMS, Jianhua was a quiet and studious boy; he had

[PAGE 431]
ambitions of graduating in six years with a top record, good enough to
get into Beijing University, from where he would launch the writing
career he dreamed about.
Students at YMS lived on campus, and life there could be rather
dull, since the Communist Party regulated almost every aspect of life in
China, including education. There were daily military drills,
propaganda classes, manual labor duty, and regular classes, which
could be rigorous.
At YMS, Jianhua developed a close friendship with a classmate
named Fangpu, perhaps the most zealous communist at school. Pale
and thin and wearing glasses, Fangpu looked the type of the
intellectual revolutionary. He was four years older than Jianhua, but
they had bonded over their common love of literature and their desire
to become writers. They had their differences—Fangpu’s poetry
centered on political issues; he worshipped Chairman Mao Zedong and
wanted to emulate not only his writings but also his revolutionary
career. Jianhua, on the other hand, had little interest in politics, even
though his father was a respected communist war veteran and
government official. But they enjoyed their literary discussions, and
Fangpu treated Jianhua like a younger brother.
In May of 1966, as Jianhua was engrossed in his studies, preparing
for the final exams to end his second year, Fangpu paid him a visit, and
he seemed unusually animated. He had been scouring the Beijing
newspapers to keep up with trends in the capital, and recently he had
read of a literary debate started by several renowned intellectuals that
he had to share with Jianhua.
These intellectuals had accused well-known, respected writers of
hiding counterrevolutionary messages in their plays, films, and
magazine articles. They based these accusations on careful readings of
certain passages in the writers’ work that could be seen as veiled
criticisms of Mao himself. “Certain people are using art and literature
to attack the party and socialism,” said Fangpu. This debate is about
the future of the revolution, he said, and Mao must be behind it all. To
Jianhua it all seemed a bit tedious and academic, but he trusted his
older friend’s instincts, and he promised to follow the events in the
newspaper.
Fangpu’s words proved prophetic: within a week, papers
throughout China had picked up the story of the raging debate.

[PAGE 432]
Teachers at YMS began to talk about some of the newspaper articles in
their classes. One day the school’s Communist Party secretary, a
paunchy man named Ding Yi, called for an assembly and gave a speech
recounting almost verbatim an editorial against the
counterrevolutionary writers. Something was definitely in the air. The
students now had to devote so many hours every day to discussing the
latest turns in the debate.
Throughout Beijing, posters with large headlines had appeared
everywhere attacking the “antiparty black line,” meaning those who
were secretly trying to put the brakes on the communist revolution.
Ding supplied the students with materials for making their own
posters, and the students happily threw themselves into the task. They
largely copied the posters from Beijing; Jianhua’s friend Zongwei, a
talented artist, made the most attractive posters of all, with his elegant
calligraphy. Within days, almost all of the walls of the school were
covered with posters, and Secretary Ding roamed around the campus
reading them, smiling and approving of the work. To Jianhua it was all
quite novel and exciting, and he loved the new look of the campus
walls.
The campaign in Beijing focused on local intellectuals everyone
knew, but in Yizhen this seemed rather distant. If China was being
infiltrated by all kinds of counterrevolutionaries, that meant that they
had also probably infiltrated the school itself, and the only logical place
for the students to look for such class enemies was among their
teachers and school officials. They began to scrutinize their lectures
and lessons for hidden messages, much as the intellectuals had done
with the work of famous writers.
The geography teacher Liu always talked about the beautiful
landscapes of China but hardly ever mentioned the inspiring words of
Mao. Could that mean something? The physics teacher Feng had an
American father who had served in the U.S. Navy; was he secretly an
imperialist? Li, the teacher of Chinese, had fought initially on the side
of the nationalists against the communists during the revolution, but
in the last year had switched sides. The students had always trusted his
version of events, and he was Jianhua’s favorite teacher because he
had such a flair for telling stories. But in retrospect he seemed a bit
old-fashioned and bourgeois. Could he still be a counterrevolutionary
nationalist at heart? Soon a few posters appeared that questioned the
fervor of some of these teachers. Secretary Ding found this a trivial

[PAGE 433]
application of the debate, and he ordered a ban on all posters attacking
teachers.
By June the movement sweeping Beijing, and soon all of China, had
acquired a name—the Great Socialist Cultural Revolution. It was
indeed Mao himself who had instigated it all by setting up the
newspaper articles, and he was to be the ongoing leader of the new
movement. He feared that China had been slipping back into its feudal
past. Old ways of thinking and acting had returned. Bureaucracies had
become breeding grounds for a new type of elite. Peasants remained
relatively powerless.
He wanted a wake-up call to revive the revolutionary spirit. He
wanted the younger generation to experience revolution firsthand by
making it themselves. He proclaimed to young people that it was “right
to rebel,” but the word he used in Chinese for this was zao fan, which
literally means to turn everything upside down. It was young people’s
duty, he said, to question authority. Those who secretly worked to pull
China back into its past he called “revisionists,” and he implored
students to help him uncover the revisionists and root them out of the
new revolutionary China.
Taking these pronouncements of Mao as a call to action, Fangpu
created the most audacious poster anyone had yet seen—it was a direct
attack on Secretary Ding himself. Ding was not only the school’s party
secretary but also a veteran of the revolution and a highly respected
figure. According to Fangpu, however, his prohibition on criticizing
teachers proved he was a revisionist, bent on suppressing the
questioning spirit Mao had encouraged. This created quite a stir. The
students had been reared to unquestioningly obey those in authority,
particularly respected party members. Fangpu had broken this taboo.
Had he gone too far?
A few days after the appearance of Fangpu’s poster, some strangers
arrived on campus from Beijing. They were part of “work teams” sent
to schools around China to help supervise and maintain some
discipline over the bourgeoning Cultural Revolution. The work team at
YMS ordered Fangpu to publicly apologize to Secretary Ding. At the
same time, however, they lifted the ban on posters that criticized
teachers. As in schools around China, they also suspended all classes
and exams at YMS. Students were to devote themselves to making
revolution, under their watchful eye.

[PAGE 434]
Suddenly feeling free of the yoke of the past and all the habits of
obedience drummed into them, the students at YMS began to brazenly
attack those teachers who had demonstrated less than revolutionary
zeal or had been unkind to students.
Jianhua felt compelled to join the campaign, but this was difficult—
he happened to like almost all of his teachers. He did not want to seem,
however, like a revisionist. Besides, he respected the wisdom and
authority of Mao. He decided to make a poster attacking Teacher Wen,
who had criticized him once for not being sufficiently interested in
politics, which had bothered him at the time. He made his criticism of
her as gentle as possible. Others took this up and went further with
their attacks on Teacher Wen, and Jianhua felt bad.
To satisfy the students’ growing anger, some teachers began to
confess to some minor revolutionary sins, but this made the students
feel they were hiding even more. They had to apply more pressure to
get them to reveal the truth, and a student nicknamed “Little Bawang”
(bawang meaning “overseer,” referring to his love of giving orders)
had an idea on how to do this. He had read Mao’s description of how
during the revolution in the 1940s peasants had captured the most
notorious landlords and paraded them through their villages with
enormous dunce caps on their heads and heavy wooden boards—with
inscriptions describing their crimes—hung around their necks. To
avoid such public humiliation, certainly the teachers would come clean
and confess. The students agreed to try this, and their first target for
such treatment was to be Teacher Li, Jianhua’s favorite.
Teacher Li was accused of faking his switch to communism. Stories
began to come out of his telling other teachers about his visits to
brothels in Shanghai. Clearly he had a secret life, and Jianhua now felt
disappointed in Li. China before the communist revolution had been a
cruel place, and if Li was working to bring that back, he could only hate
him. Unwilling to confess to any crimes, Li was the first to be paraded
through school with the dunce cap and board around his neck. Along
the way some students poured a bucket of poster paste over his head.
Jianhua followed the parade from a distance, trying to repress his
uneasiness at the humiliation of his teacher.
Led by Little Bawang, the students imposed the same fate on more
teachers, the dunce caps becoming unbearably tall and the boards
heavier. Imitating their revolutionary brothers and sisters in Beijing,

[PAGE 435]
the students initiated “struggle meetings” in which they forced certain
teachers into the jet-plane position—a student standing on either side,
pushing teachers to their knees, pulling their hair back with a jerk,
then holding their arms out and back, like the wings of a jet plane. It
was a most painful position, but it seemed to work, as after an hour or
two of this, with students jeering at them, many teachers began to
confess. The students were right in their suspicions—the school had
been teeming with revisionists, right under their noses!
Soon the students’ attention turned to the vice principal, Lin Sheng,
who they discovered was the son of a notorious landlord. He was the
third-highest official at school, which made this bit of news all the
more salacious. Jianhua had been sent to his office once for
misbehavior, and Sheng had been quite lenient with him, which he had
appreciated at the time. The students locked Lin Sheng in a room,
where he was to stay between the struggle meetings, but one morning
Jianhua, serving as the guard on duty, opened the room to discover the
vice principal had hung himself. Once again Jianhua struggled to
repress his discomfort, but he had to admit the suicide made it seem as
if Lin Sheng was indeed guilty of something.
One day, in the midst of all this, Jianhua ran into Fangpu, who was
bursting with excitement. Since his forced public apology over his
poster attacking Ding, he had been laying low. He had spent his time
devouring the writings of Mao and Marx and plotting his next move.
Word had come from Beijing that the work teams were to be
withdrawn from all schools. Students were to form their own
committee, choose a school official to be its head, and run the school
itself through the committee. Fangpu planned on becoming the
student leader of the committee. And he was going to wage open
revolution against Secretary Ding. Jianhua could only admire his
bravery and persistence.
Through Little Bawang, who had forced more and more confessions
from teachers, Fangpu learned that Secretary Ding had had affairs with
at least two female teachers, revealing his audacious hypocrisy. He was
the one continually ranting against Western decadence and was always
admonishing the male and female students at Yizhen to keep their
distance from each other. Bawang and Fangpu ransacked his office and
found that he had been hoarding food coupons and possessed a fancy
radio and bottles of nice wine, all hidden away.

[PAGE 436]
Now posters attacking Ding filled the walls. Even Jianhua felt
indignant at his behavior. Soon Ding Yi was paraded through school
and then through the town of Yizhen, on his head the most enormous
dunce cap, decorated with drawings of monsters, and a very heavy
drum hung around his neck. As he drummed with one hand while
holding the cap with the other, he had to chant, “I am Ding Yi, ox
demon and snake spirit.” Citizens of Yizhen, who knew Secretary Ding,
gaped at the spectacle. The world had indeed been turned upside
down.
By the middle of the summer, most of the teachers had fled. When it
came time to form the committee to run the school, only a few
remained to serve as chairman of the committee, and with Fangpu as
the student leader, a little-known and rather harmless teacher named
Deng Zeng was named chairman. Now the work team left YMS, and
Deng and the committee were in charge.
And as the students progressed in making revolution, Jianhua
began to feel increasingly excited. He and his friend Zongwei carried
old spears and swords as they patrolled the school looking for spies,
and it was just like in the novels he loved to read. He and the other
students marched in columns into town, waving enormous red flags,
carrying large posters of Chairman Mao and copies of his little red
book, chanting slogans, banging on drums, and crashing cymbals. It
was so dramatic, and it felt like they were indeed participating in
revolution. One day, they marched through Yizhen tearing down store
and street signs that were vestiges of prerevolutionary China. Mao
would be proud of them.
In Beijing, some students had formed groups to support and defend
Mao in his Cultural Revolution; they called themselves Red Guards,
and their members wore bright red armbands. Mao gave his personal
approval to this, and now Red Guard units began to appear in schools
and universities around the country. Only the purest and most fervent
revolutionaries could be admitted to the Red Guards, and competition
was fierce to join their ranks. Because of his father’s illustrious past,
Jianhua became a member of the Red Guards, and now he basked in
the admiring glances of fellow students and local citizens who noticed
the bright red armband that never left him.
There was one wrinkle, however, in these exciting events: On a visit
home to see his family in the nearby town of Lingzhi, Jianhua

[PAGE 437]
discovered that local students had accused his father of being a
revisionist. He cared more about farming and economics than about
making revolution, said the students. They had gotten him dismissed
from his government position; he had had to suffer through various
struggle meetings in the jet-plane position. The family was in disgrace.
Although he loved and admired his father and worried for him, he
could not help but feel anxious that, if news of this disgrace reached his
school, he might lose his red armband and be ostracized. He would
have to be careful when talking about his family.
When he returned to school several weeks later, he noticed some
radical changes that had already occurred: Fangpu had consolidated
power. He had formed a new group called the East-Is-Red Corps; he
and his team had kicked out Chairman Deng and were now running
the school themselves. They had started their own newspaper, called
Battlefield News, to promote and defend their actions. Jianhua also
learned that another teacher had died under suspicious circumstances.
One day, Fangpu visited Jianhua and invited him to be a star
reporter for Battlefield News. Fangpu looked different—he had put on
weight, was not so pale, and was trying to grow a beard. It was a
tempting offer from his friend, but something made Jianhua put him
off, and Fangpu did not like this, although he tried to disguise his
annoyance with a forced smile. Fangpu was beginning to frighten
Jianhua.
Students were now joining the East-Is-Red Corps en masse, but
within a few weeks a rival group, calling themselves the Red Rebels,
emerged on campus. Their leader was Mengzhe, a student whose
parents were peasants and who advocated revolution that was more
tolerant, based on reason and not violence, which he felt was the purer
form of Maoism. He gained some adherents, including Jianhua’s older
brother, Weihua, who was a student at YMS. Mengzhe’s growing
popularity infuriated Fangpu; he called him a royalist, a
sentimentalist, and secret counterrevolutionary. He and his followers
destroyed the Red Rebels’ office and threatened to do worse. It would
certainly cause a complete rift with Fangpu, but Jianhua contemplated
joining the Red Rebels. He was attracted to their idealism.
Just as the tension between the two sides was escalating into
outright war, a representative from the Chinese military arrived on
campus and announced that the army was now in charge. Mao had

[PAGE 438]
dispatched army units throughout the country to take control of
schools. The increasing chaos and violence that was engulfing YMS
was going on all over China, not only in schools but in factories and
government offices as well; the Cultural Revolution was spinning out
of control. Soon thirty-six soldiers arrived on campus, part of an army
unit known as the 901; they ordered that all factions disband and that
classes resume. There would be military drilling and discipline would
be reestablished.
Too much had changed, however, in the eight months since this had
all begun. The students could not accept such a sudden return to
discipline. They sulked and did not turn up at classes. Fangpu took
charge of the campaign to get rid of the soldiers: he put up posters
accusing the 901 of being enemies of the Cultural Revolution. One day,
he and his followers attacked one of the army officers with a slingshot
and wounded him. Just as the students feared reprisals, the 901 unit
was suddenly recalled from campus without any explanation.
The students were now completely on their own, and it seemed a
frightening prospect. They quickly allied themselves with one of the
two groups. Some joined the East-Is-Red Corps because it was larger
and offered better positions; others joined the Red Rebels because they
hated Fangpu and Little Bawang; and others thought one group or the
other was more revolutionary. Jianhua joined the Red Rebels, as did
his friend Zongwei.
Each side felt certain it represented the true spirit of the Cultural
Revolution, and as they yelled at one another and argued, fistfights
broke out, and there was nobody to stop them. Soon students were
bringing bats and sticks to the fights, and the injuries mounted. One
day some members of the East-Is-Red Corps captured some Red
Rebels and held them prisoners. The Red Rebels could not find out
anything about their fate.
In the middle of this tense moment, the Red Rebels discovered that
one of their members, a female student named Yulan, was actually a
spy for the other side. Infuriated by such tactics, they tied Yulan up
and began to beat her, to find out if there were more spies. Much to the
dismay of Jianhua, who considered this a betrayal of their ideals, they
battered and bruised her, but she revealed nothing. Soon Yulan was
exchanged for the prisoners held by the East-Is-Red Corps, but now
the antipathy between the two sides had reached a breaking point.

[PAGE 439]
A few weeks later, the East-Is-Red Corps suddenly left school en
masse and established their headquarters in a building in town that
they seized. Mengzhe decided to form a team of guerrilla fighters who
would operate in Yizhen at night to keep an eye on the Corps and do
some sabotage work. Jianhua was assigned to them as a reporter. It
was an exciting job. As they encountered the enemy in town, battles
with slingshots erupted. Then the Corps captured one of the Rebel
guerrillas, named Heping. A few days later, he was discovered in a
hospital, dead. The Corps had taken him for a ride in a jeep in the
desert, with a sock in his mouth, and he had suffocated along the way.
Now even Mengzhe had had enough and vowed revenge for this
horrible deed. Jianhua could only agree with him.
As the skirmishes spread throughout the town, citizens fled and
entire buildings were abandoned, and looters scoured them for goods.
The Red Rebels were soon on the offensive. Working with local
craftsmen, they manufactured the highest-quality swords and spears.
Casualties mounted. Finally the Rebels encircled the Corps’s
stronghold in town and prepared for a final offensive. The Corps fled,
leaving behind a small band of student soldiers in the building. The
Rebels demanded their surrender, and suddenly, from a third-floor
window, there was the young student Yulan screaming out, “I’d rather
die than surrender to you!” With the Corps’s bright red flag in her
hand, she shouted, “Long live Chairman Mao!” and jumped. Jianhua
found her lifeless body wrapped up in the flag on the ground. Her
devotion to the cause astounded and impressed him.
Now in control, the Red Rebels established their headquarters at
the school and prepared their defenses for a counteroffensive from the
Corps. They built a makeshift munitions factory on campus. Some
students had learned how to make grenades and various powerful
explosive devices. An inadvertent explosion killed several of them, but
the work went on. Zongwei, the artist, had had enough; somehow the
noble origins of the Red Rebels had been lost, and he feared the
expanding violence; he fled Yizhen for good. Jianhua lost respect for
his friend. How could Zongwei forget those who had been injured or
died for their cause? To give up now would be to say it was all in vain.
He would not be a coward like his friend. Besides, the East-Is-Red
Corps was downright evil and was capable of doing anything to take
power. They had betrayed the revolution.

[PAGE 440]
As life at the school settled down and the Red Rebels built up their
defenses, Jianhua visited his family, whom he had not seen for a while.
When he finally returned one night to school, however, he could not
believe his eyes: his Red Rebel comrades were nowhere in sight; their
flag was no longer flying above the school. Everywhere there were
armed soldiers. Finally he found a few comrades hiding in a school
building, and they told him what had happened: Mao was reasserting
his authority once and for all; he was picking sides in various local
conflicts to help create some order; and the military in the county had
come down on the side of the East-Is-Red Corps as the more truly
revolutionary group. The repercussions of this could be awful.
Jianhua and several other comrades decided they would try to
escape and regroup in the mountains, where Mengzhe had apparently
fled, but there was a blockade throughout the county and they were
forced back to school, which had become more of a prison, overseen by
the East-Is-Red Corps.
Now the Rebels could only expect the worst. To the Corps, they
were a bunch of counterrevolutionaries who had beaten and killed
their comrades. Then one day, as the Red Rebel members on campus
were huddled together in a room, the leaders of the East-Is-Red Corps,
including Fangpu and Little Bawang, entered with grenades tied to
their belts. Fangpu carried a blacklist of all those who were to be taken
from the room, clearly for some nefarious purpose. Fangpu appeared
friendly toward Jianhua and told him it was not too late to change
sides, but Jianhua could no longer see Fangpu in the same light. His
friendliness made him seem even more sinister.
That night they could hear the screams of their blacklisted
comrades from another building. Then news reached them that Corps
members had found Mengzhe, beaten him up, and marched him back
to school, where he was under arrest as well. In the room next to where
Jianhua and his friends now slept, they observed Little Bawang and his
team covering the windows with blankets. They were transforming it
into a torture chamber. Soon they noticed former Red Rebels limping
about on campus, afraid to talk to anyone. Then it was Jianhua’s turn
to be taken into the room. He was blindfolded and tied to a chair in a
most uncomfortable position. They wanted him to sign a withdrawal
statement, and as he hesitated to do so, they began to beat him with a
chair leg. Jianhua screamed, “You can’t do this to me. We’re
classmates. We’re all class brothers. . . .”

[PAGE 441]
Little Bawang would have none of this. Jianhua had to confess his
crimes, the part he had played in the various battles in town, and name
names of other Red Rebels hiding somewhere on campus. The blows
on his legs became more intense, and then they began to hit him over
the head. Still blindfolded, he feared for his life and in a panic
suddenly spilled the name of a fellow Red Rebel, Dusu. Finally they
carried Jianhua, unable to walk, out of the room. He quickly felt
intense regret that he had named Dusu. What a coward he had been.
He tried to warn Dusu, but it was too late. The torturing of other Red
Rebels continued in the room next door, including his brother Weihua,
beaten to a bloody pulp. Mengzhe had his head shaved, and when they
saw him next, his face was covered in the most hideous bruises.
One day Jianhua was told his old friend and comrade Zongwei had
been captured, and when Jianhua went to see him he was unconscious,
his bare legs full of large punctures, blood oozing everywhere. They
had flailed him with steel hooks for refusing to admit his crimes. How
could the rather harmless Zongwei inspire such savagery? Jianhua ran
to get the doctor, but when they returned it was too late: Zongwei died
in his friend’s arms. The dead body was quickly carted away, and a
cover story was created for how he had died. Jianhua was ordered to
remain silent. A female teacher who refused to affirm in an affidavit
the official East-Is-Red Corps version of his death was beaten and
gang-raped by Little Bawang and his followers.
In the months to come, Fangpu extended his powers everywhere, as
he essentially ran the school and classes resumed. Battlefield News
was the only newspaper allowed. The school itself had been renamed
East-Is-Red Middle School. With the Corps’s power secure, the torture
chamber was dismantled. Classes largely consisted of reciting quotes
from Mao. Every morning they assembled before a giant poster of
Chairman Mao and, brandishing their little red books, chanted to his
long life.
The East-Is-Red members began a scrupulous rewriting of the past.
They held an exhibition to celebrate their victories, full of doctored
photographs and fake news reports, all to bolster their side of events.
An enormous statue of Chairman Mao, five times larger than life, was
now installed at the school gate, towering over everything else. The
former members of the Red Rebels had to wear white armbands that
described their various crimes. They were made to kowtow before the
Mao statue several times a day while classmates kicked them from

[PAGE 442]
behind. The former Red Rebels had become like the reviled teachers,
cowed and obedient.
Jianhua was forced to do the most menial labor, and having had
enough of this, in early summer of 1968 he returned to his hometown.
His father sent him and his brother to a farm deep in the mountains
where they could be safe and work as laborers. In September,
determined to finish his studies, Jianhua returned to school. The few
months away had given him some perspective, and now when he
looked at the East-Is-Red Middle School, it appeared in a very different
light: everywhere he saw signs of unbelievable destruction—classrooms
completely torn up with no desks or chairs, the walls full of peeling
posters and crumbling plaster; the science labs devoid of all
equipment; piles of rubble around the campus; unmarked graves; the
music hall blown up by a bomb; and hardly a reputable teacher or
official left to resume their education.
All of this destruction in a few short years, and for what? What did
Heping and Yulan and Zongwei and so many others die for? What had
they been fighting over? What had they learned? He could no longer
figure it out, and the waste of their young lives filled him with disgust
and despair.
Soon Jianhua and his brother joined the army, to escape the school
and bury their memories. Over the following years, as he drove an
army truck delivering stone and cement, he and his comrades watched
the slow disassembling of the Cultural Revolution, all of its former
leaders falling into disgrace. After the death of Mao in 1976, the
Communist Party itself finally condemned the Cultural Revolution as a
national catastrophe.
• • •
Interpretation: The above story and characters come from the book
Born Red (1987) by Gao Yuan. (After the Cultural Revolution, the
author changed his name from Gao Jianhua to Gao Yuan.) It is his
nonfiction account of the events he participated in at his school during
the Cultural Revolution.
In essence, the Cultural Revolution was Mao’s attempt to try to alter
human nature itself. According to Mao, through millennia of
capitalism in various forms, humans had become individualistic and
conservative, bound to their social class. Mao wanted to wipe the slate

[PAGE 443]
clean and start over. As he explained it, “A clean sheet of paper has no
blotches, and so the newest and most beautiful pictures can be painted
on it.” To get his blank canvas, Mao would have to shake things up on a
mass scale by uprooting old habits and ways of thinking and by
eradicating people’s mindless respect for those in authority. Once he
accomplished this, Mao could start to paint something bold and new
on the clean sheet. The result would be a fresh generation that could
begin to forge a classless society not weighed down by the past.
The events depicted in Born Red reveal in a microcosm the result of
Mao’s experiment—how human nature cannot be uprooted; try to alter
it and it merely reemerges in different shapes and forms. The results of
hundreds of thousands of years of evolution and development cannot
be radically reengineered by some scheme, particularly when it
involves the behavior of humans in groups, which inevitably conforms
to certain ancient patterns. (Although it might be tempting to see what
happened at YMS as mostly relevant to group adolescent behavior,
young people often represent human nature in a more naked and purer
form than adults, who are cleverer at disguising their motivations. In
any case, what happened at the school occurred throughout China—in
government offices, factories, within the army, and among Chinese of
all ages—in an eerily similar way.) Here’s exactly how Mao’s
experiment failed and what it shows about human nature.
Mao had the following specific strategy to enact his bold idea: Focus
people’s attention on a legitimate enemy—in this case, revisionists,
those who consciously or unconsciously were clinging to the past.
Encourage people, particularly the young, to actively fight against this
reactionary force, but also against any entrenched forms of authority.
In struggling against these conservative enemies, the Chinese would be
able to free themselves from old patterns of thinking and acting; they
would finally get rid of elites and ranking systems; and they would
unify as a revolutionary class with utmost clarity as to what they were
fighting for.
His strategy, however, had a fatal flaw at its core: when people
operate in groups, they do not engage in nuanced thinking and deep
analysis. Only individuals with a degree of calmness and detachment
can do so. People in groups feel emotional and excited. Their primary
desire is to fit in to the group spirit. Their thinking tends to be
simplistic—good versus evil, with us or against us. They naturally look
for some type of authority to simplify matters for them. Deliberately

[PAGE 444]
creating chaos, as Mao did, only makes the group more certain to fall
into these primitive patterns of thinking, since it is too frightening for
humans to live with too much confusion and uncertainty.
Look at how the students at YMS responded to Mao’s call for action:
When first confronted with the Cultural Revolution, they merely
transformed Mao himself into the new authority to guide them. They
swallowed his ideas with very little personal reflection. They imitated
the actions of others in Beijing in the most conventional way. Looking
for revisionists, they tended to base their judgments on appearances—
the clothes the teachers wore, the special food or wine they drank, their
manners, their family background. Such appearances could be quite
deceptive. Teacher Wen was radical in her beliefs but was judged a
revisionist based on her fondness for Western-style fashion.
In the old order, the students were supposed to give total obedience
to their all-powerful teachers. Suddenly freed from all that, they
remained just as emotionally tied to the past. The teachers still seemed
all-powerful, but now as scheming counterrevolutionaries. The
students’ repressed resentment at having to be so obedient now boiled
over into anger and the desire to be the ones doing the punishing and
oppressing. When the teachers confessed to crimes they mostly had
never committed, to avoid the escalating punishments, that only
seemed to confirm the students in their paranoia. They had shifted
roles from obedient students to oppressors, but their thinking had
become even more simplistic and irrational, the opposite of Mao’s
intentions.
In the power vacuum that Mao had now created, another timeless
group dynamic emerged: those who were naturally more assertive,
aggressive, and even sadistic (in this case Fangpu and Little Bawang)
pushed their way forward and assumed power, while those who were
more passive (Jianhua, Zongwei) quietly receded into the background,
becoming followers. The aggressive types at YMS now formed a new
class of elites, doling out perks and privileges. Similarly, amid all the
confusion the Cultural Revolution had spawned, the students became
even more obsessed with status within the group. Who was in the red
category among them, and who in the black, they wondered? Was it
better now to come from the peasantry or the proletariat? How could
they finagle membership in the Red Guards and garner that beautiful
red armband that signified revolutionary elite status? Instead of

[PAGE 445]
naturally inclining toward a new egalitarian order, the students kept
straining to occupy superior positions.
Once all forms of authority were removed and the students ran the
school, there was nothing to stop the next and most dangerous
development in group dynamics—the split into tribal factions. By
nature, we humans reject attempts by anyone to completely
monopolize power, as Fangpu tried to do. This cuts off opportunities
for other ambitious, aggressive people. It also creates large groupings
in which individual members can feel somewhat lost. Almost
automatically, groups will split into rival smaller factions and tribes. In
the rival tribe, a new, charismatic leader (Mengzhe in this case) can
assume power and members can identify more easily with the smaller
number of comrades. The bonds are tight and made even tighter by the
struggle against the tribal enemy. People may think they are joining
because of the different ideas or goals of this tribe or the other, but
what they want more than anything is the sense of belonging and a
clear tribal identity.
Look at the actual differences between the East-Is-Red Corps and
the Red Rebels. As the battle between them intensified, it was hard to
say what they were fighting for, except to assume power over the other
group. One strong or vicious act of one side called for a reprisal from
the other, and any type of violence seemed totally justified. There could
be no middle ground, nor any questioning of the rightness of their
cause. The tribe is always right, and to say otherwise is to betray it, as
Zongwei did.
Mao had wanted to forge a unified Chinese citizenry, clear as to its
goals, and instead the entire country descended into tribal battles
completely disconnected from the original purpose of the Cultural
Revolution. To make matters worse, the crime rate soared and the
economy had ground to a halt, as hardly anyone felt compelled to work
or manufacture anything. The masses had become even lazier and
more resentful than under the old order.
By the spring of 1968, Mao’s only recourse was to install a police
state. Hundreds of thousands were thrown into prisons. The army
virtually took over. To help restore order and respect for authority,
Mao converted himself into a cult figure, his image to be worshipped
and his words to be repeated like revolutionary prayers. It is
interesting to note how Fangpu’s form of repression at YMS—the

[PAGE 446]
torture, the rewriting of history, the control of all media—mirrored
what Mao was doing throughout the country. The new revolutionary
society that Mao (and Fangpu) had wanted now actually resembled the
most repressive, superstitious regimes of feudal China. As Jianhua’s
father, a victim of the Cultural Revolution himself, kept telling his son,
“A thing turns into its opposite if pushed too far.”
Understand: We will tend to imagine that this story is an extreme
example that has little relevance to our own lives and the groups we
belong to. After all, we navigate through worlds full of sophisticated
people in high-tech offices, where everyone is seemingly so polite and
civilized. We see ourselves in a similar way: we have our progressive
ideals and our independent thinking. But much of this is an illusion. If
we looked at ourselves closely and honestly, we would have to admit
that the moment we enter our workspace or any group, we undergo a
change. We easily slip into more primitive modes of thinking and
behaving, without realizing it.
Around others, we naturally tend to feel insecure as to what they
think of us. We feel pressure to fit in, and to do so, we begin to shape
our thoughts and beliefs to the group orthodoxies. We unconsciously
imitate others in the group—in appearances, verbal expressions, and
ideas. We tend to worry a lot about our status and where we rank in the
hierarchy: “Am I getting as much respect as my colleagues?” This is the
primate part of our nature, as we share this obsession with status with
our chimpanzee relatives. Depending on patterns from early
childhood, in the group setting we become more passive or more
aggressive than usual, revealing the less developed sides of our
character.
When it comes to leaders, we generally don’t see them as ordinary
people. We tend to feel somewhat awed and intimidated in their
presence, as if they possessed some mythical extra powers. When we
contemplate our group’s main rival or enemy, we can’t help but get a
little heated and angry and exaggerate any negative qualities. If others
in the group are feeling anxious or outraged by something, we often get
swept up in the group mood. All of these are subtle indications that we
are under the influence of the group. If we are experiencing the above
transformations, we can be sure the same is going on with our
colleagues.

[PAGE 447]
Now imagine some outside threat to our group’s well-being or
stability, a crisis of sorts. All of the above reactions would be
intensified by the stress, and our apparently civilized, sophisticated
group could become quite volatile. We would feel greater pressure to
prove our loyalty and go along with anything the group advocated. Our
thinking about the rival/enemy would become even more simplistic
and heated. We would be subject to more powerful waves of viral
emotions, including panic or hatred or grandiosity. Our group could
split up into factions with tribal dynamics. Charismatic leaders could
easily emerge to exploit this volatility. If pushed far enough, the
potential for aggression lies under the surface of almost any group. But
even if we hold back from overt violence, the primitive dynamic that
takes over can have grave consequences, as the group overreacts and
makes decisions based on exaggerated fears or uncontrollable
excitement.
To resist this downward pull that groups inevitably exert on us, we
must conduct a very different experiment in human nature from
Mao’s, with a simple goal in mind—to develop the ability to detach
ourselves from the group and create some mental space for true
independent thinking. We begin this experiment by accepting the
reality of the powerful effect that the group has on us. We are brutally
honest with ourselves, aware of how our need to fit in can shape and
warp our thinking. Does that anxiety or sense of outrage that we feel
come completely from within, or is it inspired by the group? We must
observe our tendency to demonize the enemy and control it. We must
train ourselves to not blindly venerate our leaders; we respect them for
their accomplishments without feeling the need to deify them. We
must be especially careful around those who have charismatic appeal,
and try to demystify and pull them down to earth. With such
awareness, we can begin to resist and detach.
As part of this experiment we must not only accept human nature
but work with what we have to make it productive. We inevitably feel
the need for status and recognition, so let’s not deny it. Instead, let’s
cultivate such status and recognition through our excellent work. We
must accept our need to belong to the group and prove our loyalty, but
let’s do it in more positive ways—by questioning group decisions that
will harm it in the long run, by supplying divergent opinions, by
steering the group in a more rational direction, gently and
strategically. Let’s use the viral nature of emotions in the group but

[PAGE 448]
play on a different set of emotions: by staying calm and patient, by
focusing on results and cooperating with others to get practical things
done, we can begin to spread this spirit throughout the group. And by
slowly mastering the primitive part of our character within the heated
environment of the group, we can emerge as individuals who are truly
independent and rational—the end point of our experiment.
When people are free to do as they please, they usually imitate each other.
—Eric Hoffer
Keys to Human Nature
At certain moments in life, we humans may experience an energy that
is powerful, with sensations unlike any other, but this energy is
something we rarely discuss or analyze. We can describe it as an
intense feeling of belonging to a group, and we often experience it in
the following situations.
Let us say we find ourselves in a large audience for a concert,
sporting event, or political rally. At a certain point, waves of
excitement, anger, or joy move through us, shared by thousands of
others. These emotions rise in us automatically. We cannot experience
this when alone or with just a few people. In this larger group setting,
we might be led to say or do things we would never have said or done
on our own.
In a similar vein, perhaps we have to give a talk before a group. If
we are not too nervous and the crowd is on our side, we experience a
swelling of emotion from deep within. We’re feeding off the audience.
Our voice changes to a pitch and tone we never have in daily life; our
gestures and body language become unusually animated. We might
also experience this from the other side, when we listen to a
charismatic speaker. That person seems to be invested with some sort
of special force that commands our respect and fills us with increasing
excitement.
Or perhaps we find ourselves working in a group with a critical goal
to reach within a short time frame. We feel compelled to do more than
we normally can, to work extra hard. We feel a charge of energy that
comes from feeling connected to others who are working with the same
urgent spirit. A point is reached at which members of the group do not
even have to talk—we’re all on the same page and can even anticipate
the thoughts of our colleagues.

[PAGE 449]
The above feelings are not registered rationally; they come to us in
automatic bodily sensations—goose bumps, racing heartbeat, extra
vitality and power. Let us call us this energy the social force, a type of
invisible force field that affects and binds a group of people through
shared sensations and creates an intense feeling of connection.
If we confront this force field as outsiders, it tends to induce
anxiety. For instance, we find ourselves traveling to a place with a
culture very different from our own. Or we begin a job at a workplace
where people seem to have their own way of relating to one another,
with a secret language of sorts. Or we walk through a neighborhood of
a much different social class than what we’re used to—much wealthier
or poorer. In these moments, we are aware that we don’t belong, that
others are looking at us as outsiders, and from deep within we feel
uneasy and unusually alert, although in fact we may have nothing
really to fear.
We can observe several interesting elements to the social force:
First, it exists inside us and outside us at the same time. When we
experience the bodily sensations mentioned above, we are almost
certain that others on our side are feeling the same. We feel the force
within, but we think of it as outside ourselves as well. This is an
unusual sensation, perhaps equivalent to what we feel when we are in
love and experience a shared energy that passes between ourselves and
the love object.
We can also say this force differs, depending on the size and
chemistry of the particular group. In general, the larger the group, the
more intense is the effect. When we are among a very large group of
people who seem to share our ideas or values, we feel quite a rush of
increased strength and vitality, as well as a communal warmth or heat
that comes from feeling that we belong. There is something awesome
and sublime about this force multiplied in a large crowd. This increase
in energy and excitement can easily shift to anger and violence in the
presence of an enemy. The particular mix of people shapes the effect as
well. If the leader is charismatic and bursting with energy, it filters
through the group or gathered masses. If a large number of individuals
have a particular emotional tendency toward anger or joy, that will
alter the collective mood.
And finally, we are drawn to this force. We feel attracted to
numbers—a stadium full of partisan supporters of a team, choirs of

[PAGE 450]
people singing, parades, carnivals, concerts, religious assemblies, and
political conventions. In these situations, we are reliving what our
ancestors invented and refined—the gathering of the clan, massed
soldiers parading in columns before the city walls, early theatrical and
gladiatorial spectacles. Subtracting the minority who feel frightened by
such gatherings, we generally have a love of partisan crowds for their
own sake. They make us feel alive and vital. This can become an
addiction—we feel compelled to expose ourselves to this energy again
and again. Music and dance epitomize this aspect of the social force.
The group experiences the rhythm and melody as one, and music and
dance are among the earliest forms we created to satisfy this urge, to
externalize the force.
We can observe one other aspect to the social force, in its reverse
form: when we experience a prolonged period of isolation. We know
from the accounts of prisoners in solitary confinement and explorers
isolated in remote regions (see Richard E. Byrd’s account of his
harrowing five months in isolation in Antarctica, in his book Alone)
that they begin to feel disconnected from reality and sense that their
personalities are disintegrating. They become prone to elaborate
hallucinations. What they miss most of all is not simply the presence of
people near them but the eyes of others looking back at them. We
formed our whole concept of ourselves in our first months as we
looked at our mothers; her return gaze gave us a sense that we existed;
she told us who we were by how she looked at us. As adults, we
experience the same kind of nonverbal validation and sense of self
through the eyes of others who look at us. We are never aware of this;
it would take prolonged isolation to understand the phenomenon.
This is the social force at its most basic level—only the eyes of other
people can reassure us that we are real and whole and that we belong.
The social force can make itself felt in our virtual worlds and virtual
crowds. It is less intense than being in an actual crowd, but we can feel
the presence of others in a phantom-like way through the screen
(inside us and outside us), and we continually consult our
smartphones as a kind of substitute pair of eyes upon us.
The social force among humans is merely a more complex version
of what all social animals experience. Social animals are continually
attuned to the emotions of others within the group, aware of their role
in the pack and anxious to fit in. (Among higher primates, this includes

[PAGE 451]
imitating those higher up in the rank as a show of inferiority.) They
display elaborate physical cues that allow the group to communicate
and cooperate. They have grooming rituals to tighten their bonds, and
hunting in packs has a similar effect. They experience a shared energy
when simply assembled together.
We humans may seem much more sophisticated, but the same
dynamic occurs in us as well, on a completely subverbal level. We
sense and feel what others in the group are feeling. We have an urgent
need to fit in and play our role in the group. We are prone to
unconsciously imitate gestures and expressions, particularly from
leaders. We still like to hunt in packs, through social media or
wherever it is acceptable to vent our anger. We have our own rituals to
tighten group bonds—religious or political assemblies, spectacles,
warfare. And we most definitely experience a collective energy that
passes through any group of like-minded people.
What is most peculiar about this force as it exists within us is how
little we discuss or analyze something that is so obviously common to
our experience. Some of this may come from the fact that it is hard to
study these sensations in a rigorously scientific manner. But there is
also something willful about this ignorance; deep down, this
phenomenon troubles us. Our automatic reactions in a group, or our
propensity to imitate others, reminds us of the most primitive aspects
of our nature, our animal roots. We want to imagine ourselves not only
as civilized and sophisticated but also as individuals with conscious
control of much of what we do. Our group behavior tends to shatter
this myth, and historical examples such as the Cultural Revolution
frighten us with our own possibilities. We do not like to see ourselves
as social animals operating under particular compulsions. It offends
our self-opinion as a species.
Understand: The social force is neither positive nor negative. It is
simply a physiological part of our nature. Many aspects of this force
that evolved so long ago are quite dangerous in the modern world. For
instance, the deep suspicion we tend to feel toward outsiders to our
group, and our need to demonize them, evolved among our earliest
ancestors because of the tremendous dangers of infectious diseases
and the aggressive intentions of rival hunter-gatherers. But such group
reactions are no longer relevant in the twenty-first century. In fact,
with our technological prowess, they can be the source of our most
violent and genocidal behavior. In general, to the degree that the social

[PAGE 452]
force tends to degrade our ability to think independently and
rationally, we can say it exerts a downward pull into more primitive
ways of behaving, unsuited to modern conditions.
The social force, however, can be used and shaped for positive
purposes, for high-level cooperation and empathy, for an upward pull,
which we experience when we create something together in a group.
The problem we face as social animals is not that we experience this
force, which occurs automatically, but that we are in denial of its
existence. We become influenced by others without realizing it.
Accustomed to unconsciously following what others say and do, we
lose the ability to think for ourselves. When faced with critical
decisions in life, we simply imitate what others have done or listen to
people who parrot conventional wisdom. This can lead to many
inappropriate decisions. We also lose contact with what makes us
unique, the source of our power as individuals (see