chapter 2 for more on this), you are more likely

chapter 2 for more on this), you are more likely
to genuinely feel at least a part of such emotions. Practice this often
enough and confirming people’s self-opinion will become your default
position—you will have a loosening-up effect on almost everyone you
encounter.
One caveat: most people have a relatively high self-opinion, but
some people have a low opinion of themselves. They tell themselves, “I
am not worthy of good things” or “I am not such a nice person” or “I
have too many problems and issues.” Because they generally expect
bad things to happen to them, they often feel relieved and justified
when bad things do happen. In this way their low self-opinion serves to
calm their insecurities about ever getting success in life. If your targets
have a low self-opinion, the same rule applies. If you insist that they
can easily better their lives by following your advice, this will clash
with their belief that the world is against them and that they really do
not deserve such good things. They will discount your ideas and resist
you. Instead you must work from within their self-opinion,
empathizing with the injustices in their life and the difficulties they
have faced. Now, with them feeling validated and mirrored, you have
some latitude to make gentle corrections and even apply some reverse
psychology (see the section below).
Finally, the greatest obstacle you will face in developing these
powers comes from a cultural prejudice against the very idea of
influence: “Why can’t we all just be honest and transparent with one
another, and simply ask for what we want? Why can’t we just let people
be who they are and not try to change them? Being strategic is ugly and
manipulative.” First, when people tell you such things, you should be
on guard. We humans cannot stand feelings of powerlessness. We need

[PAGE 209]
to have influence or we become miserable. The honestymongers are no
different, but because they need to believe in their angelic qualities,
they cannot square this self-opinion with the need to have influence.
And so they often become passive-aggressive, pouting and making
others feel guilty as a means of getting what they want. Never take
people who say such things at face value.
Second, we humans cannot avoid trying to influence others.
Everything we say or do is examined and interpreted by others for
clues as to our intentions. We are silent? Perhaps it is because we are
upset and want to make this clear. Or we are genuinely listening as a
way of trying to impress with our politeness. No matter what we do,
people will read into it attempts at influence, and they are not wrong in
doing so. As social animals we cannot avoid constantly playing the
game, whether we are conscious of this or not.
Most people do not want to expend the effort that goes into thinking
about others and figuring out a strategic entry past their defenses.
They are lazy. They want to simply be themselves, speak honestly, or
do nothing, and justify this to themselves as stemming from some
great moral choice.
Since the game is unavoidable, better to be skillful at it than in
denial or merely improvising in the moment. In the end, being good at
influence is actually more socially beneficial than the moral stance. By
having this power, we can influence people who have dangerous or
antisocial ideas. Becoming proficient at persuasion requires that we
immerse ourselves in the perspective of others, exercising our
empathy. We might have to abide by the cultural prejudice and nod
our heads in agreement about the need for complete honesty, but
inwardly we must realize that this is nonsense and practice what is
necessary for our own well-being.
Five Strategies for Becoming a Master Persuader
The following five strategies—distilled from the examples of the
greatest influencers in history—are designed to help you focus more
deeply on your targets and create the kinds of emotional effects that
will help lower people’s resistance. It would be wise to put all five into
practice.

[PAGE 210]
1. Transform yourself into a deep listener. In the normal flow
of a conversation, our attention is divided. We hear parts of what other
people are saying, in order to follow and keep the conversation going.
At the same time, we’re planning what we’ll say next, some exciting
story of our own. Or we are even daydreaming about something
irrelevant. The reason for this is simple: we are more interested in our
own thoughts, feelings, and experiences than in those of the other
person. If this were not the case, we would find it relatively easy to
listen with full attention. The usual prescription is to talk less and
listen more, but this is meaningless advice as long as we prefer our
own internal monologue. The only solution is to somehow be
motivated to reverse this dynamic.
Think of it this way: You know your own thoughts only too well. You
are rarely surprised. Your mind tends to circle obsessively around the
same subjects. But each person you encounter represents an
undiscovered country full of surprises. Imagine for a moment that you
could step inside people’s minds and what an amazing journey that
could be. People who seem quiet and dull often have the strangest
inner lives for you to explore. Even with boors and fools, you can
educate yourself as to the origins and nature of their flaws.
Transforming yourself into a deep listener will not only prove more
amusing as you open your mind to their mind but will also provide the
most invaluable lessons about human psychology.
Once you are motivated to listen, the rest is relatively simple. You
cannot make the strategic purpose behind your listening too obvious.
The other person has to feel it is a lively exchange, even though in the
end they may do 80 percent of the talking. For this purpose, you must
not barrage them with questions that make it feel like a job interview.
Instead, pay attention to their nonverbal cues. You will see their eyes
light up when certain topics are mentioned—you must guide the
conversation in that direction. People will become chatty without
realizing it. Almost everyone likes to talk about their childhood, their
family, the ins and outs of their work, or some cause that is dear to
them. An occasional question or comment plays off something they
have said.
You are deeply absorbed in what they say, but you must feel and
appear relaxed in being so. You convey that you are listening by
maintaining relatively consistent eye contact and nodding as they talk.
The best way to signal how deeply you are listening is to occasionally

[PAGE 211]
say something that mirrors what they have said, but in your own words
and filtered through your own experience. In the end, the more they
talk, the more they will reveal about their insecurities and unmet
desires.
Your goal is to make them come away from the encounter feeling
better about themselves. You have let them be the star of the show. You
have drawn out of them the wittier, more fun-loving side of their
personality. They will love you for this and will look forward to the next
encounter. As they become increasingly relaxed in your presence, you
will have great latitude for planting ideas and influencing their
behavior.
2. Infect people with the proper mood. As social animals, we
are extremely susceptible to the moods of other people. This gives us
the power to subtly infuse into people the appropriate mood for
influencing them. If you are relaxed and anticipating a pleasurable
experience, this will communicate itself and have a mirror-like effect
on the other person. One of the best attitudes to adapt for this purpose
is one of complete indulgence. You do not judge other people; you
accept them as they are.
In the novel The Ambassadors, the writer Henry James paints the
portrait of this ideal in the form of Marie de Vionnet, an older French
woman of impeccable manners who surreptitiously uses an American
named Lambert Strether to help her in a love affair. From the very
moment he meets her, Strether is captivated. She seems a “mix of
lucidity and mystery.” She listens deeply to what he says and, without
responding, gives him the feeling she completely understands him. She
envelops him in her empathy. She acts from the beginning as if they
have become good friends, but it is in her manner, nothing she says.
He calls her indulgent spirit “a beautiful conscious mildness,” and it
has a hypnotic power over him. Well before she even asks for his help,
he is completely under her spell and will do anything for her. Such an
attitude replicates the ideal mother figure—unconditional in her love.
It is not expressed so much in words as in looks and body language. It
works equally well on men and women and has an hypnotic effect on
almost anyone.
A variation of this is to infect people with a warm feeling of rapport
through laughter and shared pleasures. Lyndon Johnson was the
master of this. Of course, he used alcohol, which flowed freely in his

[PAGE 212]
office, his targets never knowing that his own drinks were greatly
watered down so he could retain control of himself. His bawdy jokes
and colorful anecdotes created a comfortable club-like atmosphere for
men. It was hard to resist the mood he set. Johnson could also be quite
physical, often wrapping his arms around a man’s shoulder, frequently
touching him on the arm. Many studies on nonverbal cues have
demonstrated the incredible power that a simple touch of people’s
hands or arms can have in any interaction, making them think positive
things about you without their ever being aware of the source of their
good opinion. Such gentle taps establish a feeling of visceral rapport,
as long as you do not maintain eye contact, which will give it too much
of a sexual connotation.
Keep in mind that your expectations about people are
communicated to them nonverbally. It has been demonstrated, for
instance, that teachers who expect greater things from their pupils can,
without ever saying anything, have a positive effect on their work and
grades. By feeling particularly excited when you’re meeting someone,
you will communicate this to him or her in a powerful way. If there is a
person of whom you will eventually ask a favor, try imagining him or
her in the best light—generous and caring—if that is possible. Some
have claimed to get great results by simply thinking the other person is
handsome or good-looking.
3. Confirm their self-opinion. Recall the universal qualities of
the self-opinions of people with a high self-opinion. Here’s how to
approach each one of them.
Autonomy. No attempt at influence can ever work if people feel in
any way that they are being coerced or manipulated. They must choose
to do whatever it is you want them to do, or they must at least
experience it as their choice. The more deeply you can create this
impression, the greater your chances of success.
In the novel Tom Sawyer, the twelve-year-old protagonist of the
same name is portrayed as an extremely savvy boy, raised by his aunt,
with an uncanny sensitivity to human nature. Despite his cleverness,
Tom is always getting into trouble. The second chapter of the book
begins with Tom being punished for getting in a fight. Instead of
spending a hot summer Saturday afternoon messing around with his
friends and swimming in the river, Tom has to whitewash the very
large fence in the front of the house. As he starts the job, his friend Ben

[PAGE 213]
Rogers walks by, eating a delicious-looking apple. Ben is as
mischievous as Tom, and seeing him at this tedious chore, he decides
to torment him by asking him if he’s planning on going for a swim that
afternoon, knowing full well he can’t.
Tom pretends to feign deep interest in his work. Now Ben is
curious. He asks Tom if he’s seriously more interested in painting the
fence than in having some fun. Tom finally addresses him, while still
keeping an eye on his work. His aunt would not give such a job to just
anyone, he says. It is what people see first of their house when they
pass by. This is a very important job that won’t come up again for
many years. In the past he and his friends painted something on fences
and got into trouble; now he can do so freely. It is a challenge, a test of
skill. And yes, he enjoys it. Swimming can be done any old weekend,
but not this.
Ben asks if he can try his hand, to see what Tom means. After
several pleas, Tom finally relents, only after Ben offers him his apple.
Soon other boys approach and Tom does the same sell job on them,
accumulating more pieces of fruit and toys. An hour later, we see Tom
lying in the shade while a whole team of friends finishes the job for
him. Tom used basic psychology to get what he wanted. First, he got
Ben to reinterpret this job, not by saying anything but through his
absorbed attention in the task and his body language: the task must be
something interesting. Second, he framed the job as a test of skill and
intelligence, a rare opportunity, something that would appeal to any
competitive boy. And finally, as he knew, once the neighborhood boys
saw others at the task, they would want to join in, making it a group
activity. Nobody wanted to be left out. Tom could have pleaded with
dozens of friends to help him and gotten nowhere. Instead he framed it
in such a way that they wanted to do the work. They came to him,
begging for the job.
Your attempts at influence must always follow a similar logic: how
can you get others to perceive the favor you want to ask for as
something they already desire? Framing it as something pleasurable,
as a rare opportunity, and as something other people want to do will
generally have the proper effect.
Another variation on this is to appeal directly to people’s
competitive instincts. In 1948 the director Billy Wilder was casting for
his new film A Foreign Affair, which was to be set in Berlin just after

[PAGE 214]
the war. One of the main characters was a woman named Erika von
Shluetow, a German cabaret singer with suspicious ties to various
Nazis during the war. Wilder knew that Marlene Dietrich would be the
perfect actress to play the part, but Dietrich had publicly expressed her
intense dislike of anything having to do with the Nazis and had worked
hard for various Allied causes. When first approached about the role,
she found it too distasteful, and that was the end of the discussion.
Wilder did not protest or plead with her, which would have been
futile, given Dietrich’s famed stubbornness. Instead he told her he had
found two perfect American actresses to play the part, but he wanted
her opinion on which would be better. Would she view their tests?
Feeling bad that she had turned down her old friend Wilder, Dietrich
naturally agreed to this. But Wilder had cleverly tested two well-known
actresses whom he knew would be quite terrible for the role, making a
mockery of the part of a sexy German cabaret singer. The ploy worked
like a charm. The very competitive Dietrich was aghast at their
performances and immediately volunteered to do the part herself.
Finally, when giving people gifts or rewards as a possible means of
winning them over to your side, it is always best to give smaller gifts or
rewards than larger ones. Large gifts make it too apparent that you are
trying to buy their loyalty, which will offend people’s sense of
independence. Some might accept large gifts out of need, but later they
will feel resentful or suspicious. Smaller gifts have a better effect—
people can tell themselves they deserve such things and are not being
bought or bribed. In fact, such smaller rewards, spread out over time,
will bind people to you in a much greater way than anything lavish.
Intelligence. When you disagree with another person and impose
your contrary opinion, you are implying that you know better, that you
have thought things through more rationally. People challenged in this
way will then naturally become even more attached to their opinions.
You can prevent this by being more neutral, as if this opposing idea is
simply something you are entertaining and it could be wrong. But
better still, you can go much further: you see their point of view and
agree with it. (Winning arguments is rarely worth the effort.) With
their intelligence flattered, you now have some room to gently alter
their opinion or have lowered their defenses for a request for help.
The nineteenth-century British prime minister and novelist
Benjamin Disraeli conceived of an even cleverer ploy when he wrote,

[PAGE 215]
“If you wish to win a man’s heart, allow him to confute you.” You do
this by beginning to disagree with a target about a subject, even with
some vehemence, and then slowly come to seeing their point of view,
thereby confirming not only their intelligence but also their own
powers of influence. They feel ever so slightly superior to you, which is
precisely what you want. They will now be doubly vulnerable to a
countermove of your own. You can create a similar effect by asking
people for advice. The implication is that you respect their wisdom and
experience.
In 1782 the French playwright Pierre-Augustin Caron de
Beaumarchais put the finishing touches on his great masterpiece The
Marriage of Figaro. The approval of King Louis XVI was required, and
when he read the manuscript, he was furious. Such a play would lead
to a revolution, he said: “This man mocks everything that must be
respected in a government.” After much pressure he agreed to have it
privately performed in a theater at Versailles. The aristocratic audience
loved it. The king allowed more performances, but he directed his
censors to get their hands on the script and alter its worst passages
before it was presented to the public.
To bypass this, Beaumarchais commissioned a tribunal of
academics, intellectuals, courtiers, and government ministers to go
over the play with him. A man who attended the meeting wrote, “M. de
Beaumarchais announced that he would submit unreservedly to every
cut and change that the gentlemen and even the ladies present might
deem appropriate. . . . Everyone wanted to add something of his
own. . . . M. de Breteuil suggested a witticism, Beaumarchais accepted
it and thanked him. . . . ‘It will save the fourth act.’ Mme de Matignon
contributed the color of the little page’s ribbon. The color was adopted
and became fashionable.”
Beaumarchais was indeed a very clever courtier. By allowing others
to make even the smallest changes to his masterpiece, he greatly
flattered their egos and their intelligence. Of course, on the larger
changes later requested by Louis’s censors, Beaumarchais did not
relent. By then he had so won over the members of his own tribunal
that they stridently defended him, and Louis had to back down.
Lowering people’s defenses in this way on matters that are not so
important will give you great latitude to move them in the direction
you desire and get them to concede to your desires on more important
matters.

[PAGE 216]
Goodness. In our daily thoughts, we constantly comfort ourselves as
to the moral nature of our actions. If we are employees of a company,
we see ourselves as good team members. If we are bosses, we treat
people well, or at least we pay and support them well. We help the
right causes. In general, we do not like to see ourselves as selfish and
narrowly focused on our own agenda. Just as important, we want
others to see us in this light. Look at social media and how people will
make a display of supporting the best causes. Few people give to
charities anonymously—they want their names loudly advertised.
You must never inadvertently cast doubts on this saintly self-
opinion. To make positive use of this trait in people, frame what you
are asking them to do as part of a larger cause that they can participate
in. They are not merely buying clothes but helping the environment or
keeping jobs local. In taking these actions, people can feel better about
themselves. Keep it subtle. If you are trying to get recruits for a job, let
others spread the message about the cause. Make it appear prosocial
and popular. Make people want to join the group, instead of having to
plead with them. Pay great attention to the words and labels you use. It
is better, for instance, to call someone a team member than an
employee.
To put yourself in the inferior, one-down position, you can commit
some relatively harmless faux pas, even offend people in a more
pronounced way, and then ask for their forgiveness. By asking for this,
you imply their moral superiority, a position people love to occupy.
Now they are vulnerable to suggestion.
Finally, if you need a favor from people, do not remind them of
what you have done for them in the past, trying to stimulate feelings of
gratitude. Gratitude is rare because it tends to remind us of our
helplessness, our dependence on others. We like to feel independent.
Instead, remind them of the good things they have done for you in the
past. This will help confirm their self-opinion: “Yes, I am generous.”
And once reminded, they will want to continue to live up to this image
and do yet another good deed. A similar effect can come from suddenly
forgiving your enemies and forging a rapprochement. In the emotional
turmoil this creates, they will feel obligated to live up to the high
opinion you have now shown toward them and will be extra motivated
to prove themselves worthy.

[PAGE 217]
4. Allay their insecurities. Everyone has particular insecurities
—about their looks, their creative powers, their masculinity, their
power status, their uniqueness, their popularity, et cetera. Your task is
to get a bead on these insecurities through the various conversations
you draw them into.
Once you’ve identified them, you must first be extra careful not to
trigger them. People have grown sensitive antennae for any words or
body language that might cast doubt on their physical appearance or
their popularity, or whatever their insecurity may be. Be aware of this
and be on guard. Second, the best strategy is to praise and flatter those
qualities that people are most insecure about. We all crave this, even if
we somehow see through the person who is praising us. That is
because we live in a tough world in which we are continually judged,
and yesterday’s triumph is easily followed by tomorrow’s failure. We
never really feel secure. If the flattery is done right, we feel that the
flatterer likes us, and we tend to like people who like us.
The key to successful flattery is to make it strategic. If I know that I
am particularly awful at basketball, praising me for my basketball skills
in any way will ring false. But if I am uncertain about my skills, if I
imagine I am perhaps not really so bad, then any flattery on that score
can work wonders. Look for those qualities people are uncertain about
and offer reassurance. Lord Chesterfield advised his son in his letters
(later published in 1774), “Cardinal Richelieu who was undoubtedly the
ablest statesman of his time . . . had the idle vanity of being thought the
best poet too: he envied the great Corneille his reputation. Those,
therefore, who flattered skillfully, said little to him of abilities in state
affairs, or at least but en passant, and as it might naturally occur. But
the incense which they gave him, the smoke of which they knew would
turn his head in their favour, was as a . . . poet.”
If your targets are powerful and quite Machiavellian, they might feel
somewhat insecure about their moral qualities. Flattering them about
their clever manipulations might backfire, but obvious praise of their
goodness would be too transparent, because they know themselves too
well. Instead, some strategic flattery about how you have benefited
from their advice and how their criticisms helped improve your
performance will appeal to their self-opinion of being tough yet fair,
with a good heart underneath the gruff exterior.

[PAGE 218]
It is always better to praise people for their effort, not their talent.
When you extol people for their talent, there is a slight deprecation
implied, as if they were simply lucky for being born with natural skill.
Instead, everyone likes to feel that they earned their good fortune
through hard work, and that is where you must aim your praise.
With people who are your equals, you have more room to flatter.
With those who are your superiors, it is best to simply agree with their
opinions and validate their wisdom. Flattering your boss is too
transparent.
Never follow up your praise with a request for help, or whatever it is
you are after. Your flattery is a setup and requires the passage of some
time. Do not appear too ingratiating in the first encounter or two.
Better to show even a little coldness, which will give you room to warm
up. After a few days you have grown to like this person, and then a few
flattering words aimed at their insecurities will begin to melt their
resistance. If possible, get third parties to pass along your
compliments, as if they had simply overheard them. Never be too
lavish in your praise or use absolutes.
A clever way to cover your tracks is to mix in some small criticisms
of the person or their work, nothing that will trigger insecurities but
enough to give your praise a more realistic hue: “I loved your
screenplay, although I feel act two might need a little work.” Do not
say, “Your latest book is so much better than the last one.” Be very
careful when people ask you for their opinion about their work or
something related to their character or their looks. They do not want
the truth; they want support and confirmation given as realistically as
possible. Be happy to supply this for them.
You must seem as sincere as possible. It would be best to choose
qualities to praise that you actually admire, if at all possible. In any
event, what gives people away is the nonverbal cues—praise along with
stiff body language or a fake smile or eyes glancing elsewhere. Try to
feel some of the good emotions you are expressing so any exaggeration
will seem less obvious. Keep in mind that your target must have a
relatively high self-opinion. If it is low, the flattery will not jibe with
how they feel about themselves and will ring hollow, whereas for those
of high self-opinion it will seem only natural.
5. Use people’s resistance and stubbornness. Some people
are particularly resistant to any form of influence. They are most often

[PAGE 219]
people with deeper levels of insecurity and low self-opinion. This can
manifest itself in a rebellious attitude. Such types feel as if it is them
against the world. They must assert their will at all costs and resist any
kind of change. They will do the opposite of what people suggest. They
will seek advice for a particular problem or symptom, only to find
dozens of reasons of why the advice given won’t work for them. The
best thing to do is to play a game of mental judo with them. In judo you
do not counter people’s moves with a thrust of your own but rather
encourage their aggressive energy (resistance) in order to make them
fall on their own. Here are some ways to put this into practice in
everyday life.
Use their emotions: In the book Change, the therapist authors (Paul
Watzlawick, John H. Weakland, and Richard Fisch) discuss the case of
a rebellious teenager, suspended from school by the principal because
he was caught dealing drugs. He was still to do his homework at home
but was forbidden to be on campus. This would put a big dent in his
drug-dealing business. The boy burned with the desire to get
vengeance.
The mother consulted a therapist, who told her to do the following:
explain to the son that the principal believed only students who
attended class in person could do well. In the principal’s mind, by
keeping the boy away from school he was ensuring he would fail. If he
did better by working at home than in class, this would embarrass the
principal. Better to not try too hard this semester and get on the good
side of the principal by proving him right. Of course, such advice was
designed to play into his emotions. Now he desired nothing more than
to embarrass the principal and so threw himself into his homework
with great energy, the goal of the therapist all along. In essence, the
idea is not to counter people’s strong emotions but to move with them
and find a way to channel them in a productive direction.
Use their language: The therapist Milton Erickson (see chapter 3)
described the following case that he had treated: A husband came to
him for advice, although he seemed quite set on doing what he wanted
anyway. He and his wife came from very religious families and had
married mostly to please their parents. The husband and wife were
very religious as well. Their honeymoon, however, had been a disaster.
They found sex very awkward and did not feel like they were in love.
The husband decided it was not anyone’s fault but that they should get
“a friendly divorce.” Erickson readily agreed with him and suggested

[PAGE 220]
exactly how to bring about this “friendly divorce.” He instructed him to
reserve a room at a hotel. They were to have one final “friendly” night
together before the divorce. They were also to have one last “friendly”
glass of champagne, one last “friendly” kiss between them, and so on.
These instructions virtually ensured the wife’s seduction by her
husband. As Erickson had hoped, the husband followed his
instructions, the couple had an exciting evening together, and they
happily decided to remain married.
Erickson intuited that the husband did not really want a divorce
and that the two of them felt awkward because of their religious
backgrounds. They were both deeply insecure about their physical
desires, yet resistant to any kind of change. Erickson used the
husband’s language and his desire for divorce but found a way to
gently redirect the energy toward something much different. When you
use people’s words back at them, it has a hypnotic effect. How can they
not follow what you suggest when it is exactly the words they have
used?
Use their rigidity: A pawnbroker’s son once came to the great
eighteenth-century Zen master Hakuin with the following problem: he
wanted to get his father to practice Buddhism, but the man pretended
to be too busy with his bookkeeping to have time for even a single
chant or prayer. Hakuin knew the pawnbroker—he was an inveterate
miser who was only using this as an excuse to avoid religion, which he
considered a waste of time. Hakuin advised the boy to tell his father
that the Zen master himself would buy from him each prayer and
chant that he did on a daily basis. It was strictly a business deal.
Of course the pawnbroker was very happy with the deal—he could
shut his son up and make money in the process. Each day he presented
Hakuin with his bill for the prayers, and Hakuin duly paid him. But on
the seventh day he failed to show up. It seemed that he had gotten so
caught up in the chanting that he had forgotten to count how many
prayers he had done. A few days later he admitted to Hakuin he had
become completely taken up with the chants, felt so much better, and
did not need to be paid anymore. He soon became a very generous
donor to Hakuin’s temple.
When people are rigid in their opposition to something, it stems
from deep fear of change and the uncertainty it could bring. They must
have everything on their terms and feel in control. You play into their

[PAGE 221]
hands if you try with all your advice to encourage change—it gives
them something to react against and justifies their rigidity. They
become more stubborn. Stop fighting with such people and use the
actual nature of their rigid behavior to effect a gentle change that could
lead to something greater. On their own, they discover something new
(like the power of Buddhist prayer), and on their own they might take
this further, all set up by your judo maneuver.
Keep in mind the following: people often won’t do what others ask
them to do, because they simply want to assert their will. If you
heartily agree with their rebellion and tell them to keep on doing what
they’re doing, it now means that if they do so they are following your
advice, which is distasteful to them. They may very well rebel again
and assert their will in the opposite direction, which is what you
wanted all along—the essence of reverse psychology.
The Flexible Mind—Self-strategies
You find it frustrating when people resist your good ideas out of sheer
stubbornness, but you are largely unaware of how the same problem—
your own stubbornness—afflicts you and limits your creative powers.
As children our minds were remarkably flexible. We could learn at a
rate that far surpasses our adult capacities. We can attribute much of
the source of this power to our feelings of weakness and vulnerability.
Sensing our inferiority in relation to those older than us, we felt highly
motivated to learn. We were also genuinely curious and hungry for
new information. We were open to the influence of parents, peers, and
teachers.
In adolescence many of us had the experience of falling under the
sway of a great book or writer. We became entranced by the novel
ideas in the book, and because we were so open to influence, these
early encounters with exciting ideas sank deeply into our minds and
became part of our own thought processes, affecting us decades after
we absorbed them. Such influences enriched our mental landscape,
and in fact our intelligence depends on the ability to absorb the lessons
and ideas of those who are older and wiser.
Just as the body tightens with age, however, so does the mind. And
just as our sense of weakness and vulnerability motivated the desire to
learn, so does our creeping sense of superiority slowly close us off to

[PAGE 222]
new ideas and influences. Some may advocate that we all become more
skeptical in the modern world, but in fact a far greater danger comes
from the increasing closing of the mind that afflicts us as individuals as
we get older, and seems to be afflicting our culture in general.
Let us define the ideal state of the mind as one that retains the
flexibility of youth along with the reasoning powers of the adult. Such a
mind is open to the influence of others. And just as you use strategies
to melt people’s resistance, you must do the same on yourself, working
to soften up your rigid mental patterns.
To reach such an ideal, we must first adopt the key tenet of the
Socratic philosophy. One of Socrates’s earliest admirers was a young
man named Chaerephon. Frustrated that more Athenians did not
revere Socrates as he himself did, Chaerephon visited the Oracle of
Delphi and posed a question: “Is there a wiser man than Socrates in all
of Athens?” The oracle answered no.
Chaerephon felt vindicated in his admiration of Socrates and
rushed to tell his mentor the good news. Socrates, however, being a
humble man, was not at all pleased to hear this and was determined to
prove the oracle wrong. He visited many people, each eminent in their
own field—politics, the arts, business—and asked them many
questions. When they kept to knowledge of their field, they seemed
quite intelligent. But then they would expatiate on all kinds of subjects
about which they clearly knew nothing. On such subjects they merely
spouted the conventional wisdom. They did not think through any of
these ideas.
Finally Socrates had to admit that the oracle was indeed accurate—
he was wiser than all the others because he was aware of his own
ignorance. Over and over again he examined and reexamined his own
ideas, seeing inadequacies and infantile emotions lodged within them.
His motto in life had become “The unexamined life is not worth living.”
The charm of Socrates, what made him so devilishly fascinating to the
youth of Athens, was the supreme openness of his mind. In essence,
Socrates assumed the weaker, vulnerable position of the ignorant
child, always asking questions.
Think of it this way: We like to scoff at the superstitious and
irrational ideas that most people held in the seventeenth century.
Imagine how those of the twenty-fifth century will scoff at ours. Our
knowledge of the world is limited, despite the advances of science. Our

[PAGE 223]
ideas are conditioned by the prejudices instilled in us by our parents,
by our culture, and by the historical period we live in. They are further
limited by the increasing rigidity of the mind. A bit more humility
about what we know would make us all more curious and interested in
a wider range of ideas.
When it comes to the ideas and opinions you hold, see them as toys
or building blocks that you are playing with. Some you will keep,
others you will knock down, but your spirit remains flexible and
playful.
To take this further, you can adopt a strategy promulgated by
Friedrich Nietzsche: “He who really wants to get to know something
new (be it a person, an event, a book) does well to entertain it with all
possible love and to avert his eyes quickly from everything in it he finds
inimical, repellent, false, indeed to banish it from mind: so that, for
example, he allows the author of a book the longest start and then, like
one watching a race, desires with beating heart that he may reach his
goal. For with this procedure one penetrates to the heart of the new
thing, to the point that actually moves it: and precisely this is what is
meant by getting to know it. If one has gone this far, reason can
afterwards make its reservations; that over-estimation, that temporary
suspension of the critical pendulum, was only an artifice for luring
forth the soul of the thing.”
Even in writing that is inimical to your own ideas there is often
something that rings true, which represents the “soul of the thing.”
Opening yourself up to its influence in this way should become part of
your mental habits, allowing you to better understand things, even to
criticize them properly. Sometimes, however, that “soul” will move you
as well and gain some influence, enriching your mind in the process.
Upon occasion it is good to let go of your deepest set of rules and
restrictions. The great fourteenth-century Zen master Bassui posted at
the door of his temple a list of thirty-three rules his monks were to
abide by or be thrown out. Many of the rules dealt with alcohol, which
was strictly forbidden. One night, to totally disconcert his literal-
minded monks, he showed up to a talk completely drunk. He never
apologized or repeated it, but the lesson was simple: such rules are
merely guidelines, and to demonstrate our freedom we must violate
them from time to time.

[PAGE 224]
Finally, when it comes to your own self-opinion, try to have some
ironic distance from it. Make yourself aware of its existence and how it
operates within you. Come to terms with the fact that you are not as
free and autonomous as you like to believe. You do conform to the
opinions of the groups you belong to; you do buy products because of
subliminal influence; you can be manipulated. Realize as well that you
are not as good as the idealized image of your self-opinion. Like
everyone else, you can be quite self-absorbed and obsessed with your
own agenda. With this awareness, you will not feel the need to be
validated by others. Instead you will work at making yourself truly
independent and concerned with the welfare of others, as opposed to
staying attached to the illusion of your self-opinion.
There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of influence. No
other activity was like it. To project one’s soul into some gracious form, and
let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one’s own intellectual views echoed
back to one with all the added music of passion and youth; to convey one’s
temperament into another as though it were a subtle fluid or a strange
perfume: there was a real joy in that—perhaps the most satisfying joy left to
us in an age so limited and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its
pleasures, and grossly common in its aims.
—Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray

[PAGE 225]
8
Change Your Circumstances by
Changing Your Attitude
The Law of Self-sabotage
Each of us has a particular way of looking at the world, of
interpreting events and the actions of people around us. This is
our attitude, and it determines much of what happens to us in life. If
our attitude is essentially fearful, we see the negative in every
circumstance. We stop ourselves from taking chances. We blame
others for mistakes and fail to learn from them. If we feel hostile or
suspicious, we make others feel such emotions in our presence. We
sabotage our career and relationships by unconsciously creating the
circumstances we fear the most. The human attitude, however, is
malleable. By making our attitude more positive, open, and tolerant
of other people, we can spark a different dynamic—we can learn from
adversity, create opportunities out of nothing, and draw people to us.
We must explore the limits of our willpower and how far it can take
us.
The Ultimate Freedom
As a child, Anton Chekhov (1860–1904)—the future celebrated writer
—faced each morning with a feeling of dread: would he be beaten that
day by his father or somehow spared? Without warning, and
sometimes without any apparent cause, his father, Pavel Yegorovich,
would strike him hard several times with a cane or a whip or the back
of his hand. What made it doubly confusing was that his father did not
beat him out of any apparent malice or anger. He told Anton he was
doing it out of love. It was God’s will that children be beaten, to instill
humility. That was how he had been raised, and look at what a fine

[PAGE 226]
man he had turned into. At the end of the beating, young Anton had to
kiss his father’s hand and ask to be forgiven. At least he was not alone
in this ordeal—his four brothers and one sister all received the same
treatment.
The beating was not the only thing he came to dread. In the
afternoon he would hear his father’s approaching footsteps outside
their ramshackle wooden house, and he would tremble with fear. More
often than not he was coming to the house at that hour to ask the child
Anton to replace him in the grocery shop that he owned, in the
backwater town of Taganrog, Russia, where the family lived. For most
of the year, the shop was unbearably cold. While minding the counter,
Anton would try to do his homework, but his fingers would quickly
become numb and the ink in the pot for his pen would freeze up. In
that mess of a store, which smelled of rancid meat, he would have to
listen to the dirty jokes of the Ukrainian peasants who worked there,
and witness the lewd behavior of the assortment of town drunks who
wandered in for their shots of vodka. In the midst of all this, he had to
make sure that every kopeck was accounted for, or he would get an
added thrashing from his father. He would often be left there for hours
while his father was getting drunk somewhere else.
His mother would try to intervene. She was a gentle soul who was
no match for her husband. The boy was too young to work, she would
say. He needed time for his studies. Sitting in the freezing shop was
ruining his health. The father would thunder back that Anton was lazy
by nature, and only through hard work could he become a respectable
citizen.
There was no respite from the father’s presence. On Sunday, the one
day the shop was closed, he would wake the children up at four or five
in the morning to rehearse their singing for the church choir, of which
he was the director. Once home from the service, they would have to
repeat it, ritual by ritual, on their own, then return for the noon mass.
By the time it was over, they were all too exhausted to play.
In the moments he had to himself, Anton would wander around
town. Taganrog was a grim place to grow up. The fronts of almost all of
the houses were decaying and crumbling, as if they were already
ancient ruins. The roads were not paved, and when the snow melted
there was mud everywhere, with giant potholes that could swallow a
child up to the neck. There were no streetlights. Prisoners would be

[PAGE 227]
tasked with finding the stray dogs on the streets and beating them to
death. The only quiet and safe place was the surrounding graveyards,
and Anton would visit them often.
On these walks, he would wonder about himself and the world. Was
he really so worthless that he deserved the almost daily beatings from
his father? Perhaps. And yet his father was a walking contradiction—he
was lazy, a drunk, and quite dishonest with customers, despite his
religious zeal. And the citizens of Taganrog were equally ridiculous and
hypocritical. He would observe them at the cemetery, trying to act
pious during the funeral service but then excitedly whispering to one
another about the delicious cakes they would eat later at the home of
the widow, as if that was why they had shown up.
His only recourse in the face of the pain and boredom he constantly
felt was to laugh at it all. He became the family clown, imitating the
characters of Taganrog and inventing stories about their private lives.
Sometimes his humor turned aggressive. He played cruel practical
jokes on other children in the neighborhood. Sent to the market by his
mother, he often tormented the live duck or chicken that he carried
home in a sack. He was becoming impish and quite lazy.
Then in 1875, everything changed for the Chekhov family. Anton’s
two older brothers, Alexander and Nikolai, had had enough of their
father. They decided to move together to Moscow, Alexander to pursue
a university degree and Nikolai to become an artist. This snubbing of
his authority infuriated the father, but he could not stop them. At
around the same time, Pavel Yegorovich had to finally confront his
complete mismanagement of the grocery store—he had piled up debts
over the years and now the bills came due. Facing bankruptcy and
almost certainly time in the debtor’s prison, he quietly slipped out of
town one night, without telling his wife, and escaped to Moscow,
intending to live with his sons.
The mother was forced to sell the family possessions to pay the
debts. A boarder who lived with them offered to help the mother with
their case against the creditors, but much to her surprise, he used his
court connections to swindle the Chekhovs out of their house. Without
a penny to her name, the mother was forced to leave for Moscow with
the other children. Only Anton would stay to finish his studies and get
his diploma. He was charged with selling all of the remaining family
belongings and sending the money to Moscow as soon as possible. The

[PAGE 228]
former boarder, now owner of the house, gave Anton a corner of one
room to live in, and so at the age of sixteen, with no money of his own
and no family to look after him, Anton was suddenly left to fend for
himself in Taganrog.
Anton had never really been alone before. His family had been his
whole life, for better or worse. Now it was as if the bottom had dropped
out. He had no one to turn to for help in any way. He blamed his father
for this miserable fate, for being trapped in Taganrog. One day he felt
angry and bitter, the next day depressed. But soon it became clear that
he had no time for such sentiments. He had no money or resources,
and yet somehow he had to survive. So he hired himself out as a tutor
to as many families as possible. When they went on vacation he would
often go hungry for days. His one jacket was threadbare; he had no
galoshes for the heavy rains. He felt ashamed when he entered people’s
houses, shivering and his feet all wet. But at least he was now able to
support himself.
He had decided to become a doctor. He had a scientific frame of
mind, and doctors made a good living. To get into medical school he
would have to study much harder. Frequenting the town library, the
only place he could work in peace and quiet, he began to also browse
the literature and philosophy sections, and soon he felt his mind
soaring far beyond Taganrog. With books, he no longer felt so trapped.
At night, he returned to his corner of a room to write stories and sleep.
He had no privacy, but he could keep his corner neat and tidy, free of
the usual disorder of the Chekhov household.
He had finally begun to settle down, and new thoughts and
emotions came to him. Work was no longer something he dreaded; he
loved absorbing his mind in his studies, and tutoring had made him
feel proud and dignified—he could take care of himself. Letters came
from his family—Alexander ranting and complaining about their father
making everyone miserable again; Mikhail, the youngest son, feeling
worthless and depressed. Anton wrote back to Alexander: stop
obsessing over our father and start taking care of yourself. He wrote to
Mikhail: “Why do you refer to yourself as my ‘worthless, insignificant
little brother’? Do you know where you should be aware of your
worthlessness? Before God, perhaps . . . but not before people. Among
people you should be aware of your worth.” Even Anton was surprised
by the new tone he was taking in these letters.

[PAGE 229]
Then one day, several months after being abandoned, he wandered
through the streets of Taganrog and suddenly felt welling up from
within a tremendous and overwhelming sense of empathy and love for
his parents. Where did this come from? He had never felt this before.
In the days leading up to this moment he had been thinking long and
hard about his father. Was he really to blame for all their problems?
Pavel’s father, Yegor Mikhailovich, had been born a serf, serfdom being
a form of indentured slavery. The Chekhovs had been serfs for several
generations. Yegor had finally been able to buy the family’s freedom,
and he set his three sons up in different fields, Pavel designated as the
family merchant. But Pavel could not cope. He had an artistic
temperament, could have been a talented painter or musician. He felt
bitter at his fate—a grocery store and six children. His father had
beaten him, and so he beat his children. Although no longer a serf,
Pavel still bowed and kissed the hand of every local official and
landowner. He remained a serf at heart.
Anton could see that he and his siblings were falling into the same
pattern—bitter, secretly feeling worthless, and wanting to take their
anger out on others. Now that he was alone and taking care of himself,
Anton yearned to be free in the truest sense of the word. He wanted to
be free of the past, free of his father. And here, as he walked the streets
of Taganrog, the answer came to him from these new and sudden
emotions. Understanding his father, he could accept and even love
him. He was not some imposing tyrant but a rather helpless old man.
With a bit of distance, he could feel compassion and forgive the
beatings. He would not become enmeshed in all of the negative
feelings his father inspired. And he could finally value as well his kind
mother, and not blame her for being so weak. With his mind emptied
of rancor and obsessive thoughts of his lost childhood, it was as if a
great weight had been suddenly lifted off him.
He made a vow to himself: no more bowing and apologizing to
people; no more complaining and blaming; no more disorderly living
and wasting time. The answer to everything was work and love, work
and love. He had to spread this message to his family and save them.
He had to share it with mankind through his stories and plays.
Finally in 1879 Anton moved to Moscow to be with his family and to
attend medical school, and what he saw there made him despondent.
The Chekhovs and a few boarders were all crammed in a single room in
the basement of a tenement, in the middle of the red-light district. The

[PAGE 230]
room had little ventilation and almost no light. Worst of all was the
morale of the group. His mother was beaten down by the constant
anxieties about money and the subterranean existence. His father
drank even more and held some odd jobs that were quite a step down
from owning a business. He continued to beat his children.
Anton’s younger siblings were no longer in school (the family could
not afford it) and felt completely useless. Mikhail in particular was
even more depressed than ever. Alexander had gotten work as a writer
for magazines, but he felt he deserved much better and started to drink
heavily. He blamed his problems on his father for following him to
Moscow and haunting his every move. Nikolai, the artist, slept till late,
worked sporadically, and spent most of his time at the local tavern. The
entire family was spiraling downward at an alarming rate, and the
neighborhood they lived in only made it worse.
The father and Alexander had recently moved out. Anton decided
he needed to do the opposite—move into the cramped room and
become the catalyst for change. He would not preach or criticize but
rather set the proper example. What mattered was keeping the family
together and elevating their spirits. To his overwhelmed mother and
sister he announced that he would take charge of the housework.
Seeing Anton cleaning and ironing, his brothers now agreed to share in
these duties. He scrimped and saved from his own medical school
scholarship and got more money from his father and Alexander. With
this money he put Mikhail, Ivan, and Maria back into school. He
managed to find his father a better job. Using his father’s money and
his own savings, he was able to move the entire family to a much larger
apartment with a view.
He worked to improve all aspects of their lives. He got his brothers
and sister to read books he had chosen, and well into the night they
would discuss and argue the latest findings in science and
philosophical questions. Slowly they all bonded on a much deeper
level, and they began to refer to him as Papa Antosha, the leader of the
family. The complaining and self-pitying attitude he had first
encountered had mostly disappeared. His two younger brothers now
talked excitedly about their future careers.
Anton’s greatest project was to reform Alexander, whom he
considered the most gifted yet troubled member of the family. Once
Alexander came home completely drunk, began to insult the mother

[PAGE 231]
and sister, and threatened to smash Anton’s face in. The family had
become resigned to these tirades, but Anton would not tolerate this. He
told Alexander the next day that if he ever yelled at another family
member, he would lock him out and disavow him as a brother. He was
to treat his mother and sister with respect and not blame the father for
his turning to drink and womanizing. He must have some dignity—
dress well and take care of himself. That was the new family code.
Alexander apologized and his behavior improved, but it was a
continual battle that demanded all of Anton’s patience and love, for the
self-destructive streak in the Chekhovs was deeply ingrained. It had led
Nikolai to an early death from alcoholism, and without constant
attention Alexander could easily follow the same path. Slowly Anton
weaned him from drinking and helped him with his journalistic career,
and eventually Alexander settled into a quiet and satisfying life.
Sometime in 1884, Anton had begun to spit blood, and it was
apparent to him that he had the preliminary signs of tuberculosis. He
refused to submit to the examination of a fellow doctor. He preferred
not to know and to go on writing and practicing medicine without
worrying about the future. But as he became increasingly famous for
his plays and short stories, he began to experience a new kind of
discomfort—the envy and petty criticisms of his fellow writers. They
formed various political cliques and endlessly attacked one another,
including Anton himself, who had refused to ally himself with any
revolutionary cause. All of this made Anton feel increasingly
disenchanted with the literary world. The elevated mood he had so
carefully crafted in Taganrog was dissipating. He became depressed
and considered giving up writing entirely.
Then, toward the end of 1889, he thought of a way to free himself
from his growing depression. Since his days in Taganrog, the poorest
and most abject members of society had fascinated him. He liked to
write about thieves and con artists, and get inside their minds. The
lowliest members of Russian society were its prisoners, who lived in
ghastly conditions. And the most notorious prison in Russia was on
Sakhalin Island, just north of Japan. It housed five penal colonies with
hundreds of thousands of prisoners and their families. It was like a
shadow state—nobody in Russia had any idea what really went on on
the island. This could be the answer to his present misery. He would
make the arduous trek across Siberia to the island. He would interview
the most hardened criminals. He would write a detailed book on the

[PAGE 232]
conditions there. Far from the pretentious literary world, he would
connect to something very real and reignite the generous mood he had
crafted in Taganrog.
His friends and family tried to dissuade him. His health had gotten
worse; the travel could kill him. But the more they tried to dissuade
him, the more he felt certain it was the only way to save himself.
After a three-month journey he finally arrived at the island in July
of 1890, and he immediately immersed himself in this new world. His
task was to interview every possible prisoner, including the most
vicious murderers. He investigated every aspect of their lives. He
witnessed the most gruesome torture sessions of prisoners and
followed convicts as they worked in the local mines, chained to
wheelbarrows. Prisoners who completed their sentences would often
have to stay on the island in labor camps, and so Sakhalin was full of
wives waiting to join them in these camps. These women and their
daughters would resort to prostitution to stay alive. Everything was
designed to degrade people’s spirits and drain them of every ounce of
dignity. It reminded him of his family dynamic, on a much larger scale.
This was certainly the lowest rung of hell he could have visited, and
it affected him deeply. He now longed to return to Moscow and write
about what he had seen. His sense of proportion had been restored. He
had finally freed himself of the petty thoughts and concerns that had
weighed him down. Now he could get outside of himself and feel
generous again. The book he wrote, Sakhalin Island, caught the
attention of the public and led to substantial reforms of conditions on
the island.
By 1897 his health had deteriorated, and he began to cough blood
rather regularly. He could no longer disguise his tuberculosis from the
world at large. The doctor who treated him advised that he retire from
all work and leave Moscow for good. He needed rest. Perhaps by living
in a sanatorium he could extend his life a few years. Anton would have
none of this. He would live as if nothing had changed.
A cult had begun to form around Chekhov, comprising younger
artists and adoring fans of his plays, all of which had made him one of
Russia’s most famous writers. They came to visit him in large numbers,
and although he was clearly ailing, he radiated a calmness that
astonished almost everyone. Where did it come from? Was he born

[PAGE 233]
this way? He seemed to absorb himself completely in their stories and
problems. No one ever heard him talk about his illness.
In the winter of 1904, as his condition worsened, he suddenly had
the desire to take an open-sleigh ride into the country. Hearing the
bells of the sleigh and breathing the cold air had always been one of his
greatest pleasures, and he needed to feel this one more time. It put him
in such high spirits that he did not care anymore about the
consequences, which were dire. He died a few months later.
• • •
Interpretation: The moment his mother left him to be alone in
Taganrog, young Anton Chekhov felt trapped, as if he had been thrown
into prison. He would be forced to work as much as he could outside
his studies. He was now stuck in this hopelessly dull backwater with no
support system, living in the corner of a small room. Bitter thoughts
about his fate and about the childhood he had never had gnawed at
him in his few free moments. But as the weeks went by, he noticed
something very strange—he actually liked the work he did as a tutor,
even though the pay was meager and he was continually running
around town. His father had kept telling him he was lazy, and he had
believed it, but now he was not so sure. Each day represented a
challenge to find more work and put food on the table. He was
succeeding in this. He was not some miserable worm who needed a
beating. Besides, the work was a way to get outside himself and
immerse his mind in the problems of his students.
The books he read took him far away from Taganrog and filled him
with interesting thoughts that lingered in his mind for entire days.
Taganrog itself was not so bad. Each shop, each house contained the
oddest characters, supplying him endless material for stories. And that
corner of the room—that was his kingdom. Far from feeling trapped,
he now felt liberated. What had actually changed? Certainly not his
circumstances, or Taganrog, or the corner of the room. What had
changed was his attitude, which opened him up to new experiences
and possibilities. Once he felt this, he wanted to take it further. The
greatest remaining impediment to this sense of freedom was his father.
No matter what he tried, he couldn’t seem to get rid of deep feelings of
bitterness. It was as if he could still feel the beatings and hear the
endless pointed criticisms.

[PAGE 234]
As a last resort, he tried to analyze his father as if he were a
character in a story. This led him to think about his father’s father and
all the generations of Chekhovs. As he considered his father’s erratic
nature and his wild imagination, he could understand how he must
have felt trapped by his circumstances, and why he turned to drinking
and tyrannizing the family. He was helpless, more a victim than an
oppressor. This understanding of his father laid the groundwork for
the sudden rush of unconditional love he felt one day for his parents.
As he glowed with this new emotion, he finally felt completely liberated
from resentments and anger. The negative emotions from the past had
finally fallen away from him. His mind could now be completely open.
The sensation was so exhilarating that he had to share it with his
siblings and free them as well.
What had brought Chekhov to this point was the crisis he had faced
when left alone at such a young age. He experienced another such
crisis some thirteen years later, when he became depressed about the
pettiness of his fellow writers. His solution was to reproduce what had
happened in Taganrog, but in reverse—he would be the one to abandon
others and force himself to be alone and vulnerable. In this way he
could reexperience the freedom and empathy he had felt in Taganrog.
The early death sentence from tuberculosis was the last crisis. He
would let go of his fear of death, and the bitter feelings that came with
having his life cut short, by continuing to live at full tilt. This final and
ultimate freedom gave him a radiance that almost everyone who met
him in this period could feel.
Understand: The story of Anton Chekhov is really a paradigm for
what we all face in life. We carry with us traumas and hurts from early
childhood. In our social life, as we get older, we accumulate
disappointments and slights. We too are often haunted by a sense of
worthlessness, of not really deserving the good things in life. We all
have moments of great doubt about ourselves. These emotions can lead
to obsessive thoughts that dominate our minds. They make us curtail
what we experience as a way to manage our anxiety and
disappointments. They make us turn to alcohol or any kind of habit to
numb the pain. Without realizing it, we assume a negative and fearful
attitude toward life. This becomes our self-imposed prison. But this is
not how it has to be. The freedom that Chekhov experienced came
from a choice, a different way of looking at the world, a change in
attitude. We can all follow such a path.

[PAGE 235]
This freedom essentially comes from adopting a generous spirit—
toward others and toward ourselves. By accepting people, by
understanding and if possible even loving them for their human
nature, we can liberate our minds from obsessive and petty emotions.
We can stop reacting to everything people do and say. We can have
some distance and stop ourselves from taking everything personally.
Mental space is freed up for higher pursuits. When we feel generous
toward others, they feel drawn to us and want to match our spirit.
When we feel generous toward ourselves, we no longer feel the need to
bow and scrape and play the game of false humility while secretly
resenting our lack of success. Through our work and through getting
what we need on our own, without depending on others, we can stand
tall and realize our potential as humans. We can stop reproducing the
negative emotions around us. Once we feel the exhilarating power
from this new attitude, we will want to take it as far as possible.
Years later, in a letter to a friend, Chekhov tried to summarize his
experience in Taganrog, referring to himself in the third person: “Write
about how this young man squeezes the slave out of himself drop by
drop and how one fine morning he awakes to find that the blood
coursing through his veins is no longer the blood of a slave but that of a
real human being.”
The greatest discovery of my generation is the fact that human beings can
alter their lives by altering their attitudes of mind.
—William James
Keys to Human Nature
We humans like to imagine that we have an objective knowledge of the
world. We take it for granted that what we perceive on a daily basis is
reality—this reality being more or less the same for everybody. But this
is an illusion. No two people see or experience the world in the same
way. What we perceive is our personal version of reality, one that is of
our own creation. To realize this is a critical step in our understanding
of human nature.
Imagine the following scenario: A young American must spend a
year studying in Paris. He is somewhat timid and cautious, prone to
feelings of depression and low self-esteem, but he’s genuinely excited
by this opportunity. Once there, he finds it hard to speak the language,
and the mistakes he makes and the slightly derisory attitude of the

[PAGE 236]
Parisians make it even harder for him to learn. He finds the people not
friendly at all. The weather is damp and gloomy. The food is too rich.
Even Notre Dame Cathedral seems disappointing, the area around it so
crowded with tourists. Although he has pleasurable moments, he
generally feels alienated and unhappy. He concludes that Paris is
overrated and a rather unpleasant place.
Now imagine the same scenario but with a young woman who is
more extroverted and has an adventurous spirit. She’s not bothered by
making mistakes in French, nor by the occasional snide remark from a
Parisian. She finds learning the language a pleasant challenge. Others
find her spirit engaging. She makes friends more easily, and with more
contacts her knowledge of French improves. She finds the weather
romantic and quite suitable to the place. To her, the city represents
endless adventures and she finds it enchanting.
In this case, two people see and judge the same city in opposite
ways. As a matter of objective reality, the weather of Paris has no
positive or negative qualities. Clouds simply pass by. The friendliness
or unfriendliness of the Parisians is a subjective judgment—it depends
on whom you meet and how they compare with the people where you
come from. Notre Dame Cathedral is merely an agglomeration of
carved pieces of stone. The world simply exists as it is—things or
events are not good or bad, right or wrong, ugly or beautiful. It is we
with our particular perspectives who add color to or subtract it from
things and people. We focus on either the beautiful Gothic architecture
or the annoying tourists. We, with our mind-set, can make people
respond to us in a friendly or unfriendly manner, depending on our
anxiety or openness. We shape much of the reality that we perceive,
dictated by our moods and emotions.
Understand: Each of us sees the world through a particular lens
that colors and shapes our perceptions. Let us call this lens our
attitude. The great Swiss psychologist Carl Jung defined this in the
following way: “Attitude is a readiness of the psyche to act or react in a
certain way. . . . To have an attitude means to be ready for something
definite, even though this something is unconscious; for having an
attitude is synonymous with an a priori orientation to a definite
thing.”
What this means is the following: In the course of a day, our minds
respond to thousands of stimuli in the environment. Depending on the

[PAGE 237]
wiring of our brain and our psychological makeup, certain stimuli—
clouds in the sky, crowds of people—lead to stronger firings and
responses. The stronger the response, the more we pay attention. Some
of us are more sensitive to stimuli that others would mostly ignore. If
we are unconsciously prone to feelings of sadness, for whatever reason,
we are more likely to pick up signs that promote this feeling. If we have
a suspicious nature, we are more sensitive to facial expressions that
display any kind of possible negativity and to exaggerate what we
perceive. This is the “readiness of the psyche to . . . react in a certain
way.”
We are never conscious of this process. We merely experience the
aftereffects of these sensitivities and firings of the brain; they add up to
an overall mood or emotional background that we might call
depression, hostility, insecurity, enthusiasm, or adventurousness. We
experience many different moods, but in an overall sense we can say
that we have a particular way of seeing and interpreting the world,
dominated by one emotion or a blend of several, such as hostility and
resentment. This is our attitude. People with a largely depressive
attitude can feel moments of joy, but they are more disposed toward
experiencing sadness; they anticipate the feeling in their day-to-day
encounters.
Jung illustrates this idea in the following way: Imagine that on a
hike people come upon a brook that must be crossed to continue the
journey. One person, without much thought, will simply leap across,
touching a stone or two, not worried at all about possibly falling. He
loves the sheer physical pleasure of the jump and doesn’t care if he
fails. Another person is excited as well, but it has less to do with the
physical joy than with the mental challenge the brook represents. She
will quickly calculate the most effective means of crossing and will gain
satisfaction from figuring this out. Another person, of a cautious
nature, will take more time to think it through. He takes no pleasure in
the crossing; he is irritated by the obstruction, but he wants to
continue the hike and he will do his best to safely cross. A fourth will
simply turn back. She will see no need for crossing and will rationalize
her fears by saying the hike has been long enough.
No one simply sees or hears the rushing of water over rocks. Our
minds do not perceive just what is there. Each person sees and
responds to the same brook differently, according to their particular
attitude—adventurous, fearful, et cetera.

[PAGE 238]
The attitude that we carry with us throughout life has several roots:
First, we come into this world with certain genetic inclinations—
toward hostility, greed, empathy, or kindness. We can notice these
differences, for instance, in the case of the Chekhov children, who all
had to respond to the same physical punishments of the father. At a
very early age Anton revealed a more ironic attitude, prone to laughing
at the world and seeing things with some detachment. This made it
easier for him to reassess his father once he was on his own. The other
children lacked this ability to distance themselves and were more
easily enmeshed in the father’s brutality. This would seem to indicate
something different in the way Anton’s brain was wired. Some children
are greedier than others—they display from early on a greater need for
attention. They tend to always see what is missing, what they are not
getting from others.
Second, our earliest experiences and attachment schemas (see
chapter 4) play a large role in shaping the attitude. We internalize the
voices of the mother and father figure. If they were very authoritarian
and judgmental, we will tend to be harsher on ourselves than others
and have a more critical bent toward everything we see. Equally
important are the experiences we have outside the family, as we get
older. When we love or admire someone, we tend to internalize a part
of their presence, and they shape how we see the world in a positive
way. This could be teachers, mentors, or peers. Negative and traumatic
experiences can have a constricting effect—they close our minds off to
anything that might possibly make us reexperience the original pain.
Our attitude is constantly being shaped by what happens to us, but
vestiges of our earliest attitude always live on. No matter how far he
progressed, Chekhov remained susceptible to feelings of depression
and self-loathing.
What we must understand about the attitude is not only how it
colors our perceptions but also how it actively determines what
happens to us in life—our health, our relations with people, and our
success. Our attitude has a self-fulfilling dynamic.
Look again at the scenario of the young man in Paris. Feeling
somewhat tense and insecure, he reacts defensively to mistakes that he
makes in learning the language. This makes it harder for him to learn,
which in turn makes meeting people more difficult, which makes him
feel more isolated. The more his energy lowers from depression, the
more this cycle perpetuates itself. His insecurities can also push people

[PAGE 239]
away. The way we think about people tends to have a like effect upon
them. If we feel hostile and critical, we tend to inspire critical emotions
in other people. If we feel defensive, we make others feel defensive.
The attitude of the young man tends to lock him into this negative
dynamic.
The attitude of the young woman, on the other hand, triggers a
positive dynamic. She is able to learn the language and meet people, all
of which elevates her mood and energy levels, which makes her more
attractive and interesting to others, on and on.
Although attitudes come in many varieties and blends, we can
generally categorize them as negative and narrow or positive and
expansive. Those with a negative attitude tend to operate from a basic
position of fear toward life. They unconsciously want to limit what they
see and experience to give them more control. Those with a positive
attitude have a much less fearful approach. They are open to new
experiences, ideas, and emotions. If the attitude is like our lens on the
world, the negative attitude narrows the aperture of this lens, and the
positive variety expands it as far as possible. We might move between
these two poles, but generally we tend to see the world with a more
closed or open lens.
Your task as a student of human nature is twofold: First, you must
become aware of your own attitude and how it slants your perceptions.
It is hard to observe this in your day-to-day life because it is so close to
you, but there are ways to catch glimpses of it in action. You can see it
in how you judge people once they are out of your presence. Are you
quick to focus on their negative qualities and bad opinions, or are you
more generous and forgiving when it comes to their flaws? You will see
definite signs of your attitude in how you face adversity or resistance.
Are you quick to forget or gloss over any mistakes on your part? Do
you instinctively blame others for any bad things that happen to you?
Do you dread any kind of change? Do you tend to keep to routines and
to avoid anything unexpected or unusual? Do you get your back up
when someone challenges your ideas and assumptions?
You will also catch signs of it in how people respond to you,
particularly in a nonverbal way. Do you catch them being nervous or
defensive in your presence? Do you tend to attract people who play the
mother or father role in your life?

[PAGE 240]
Once you have a good feel for the makeup of your own attitude, its
negative or positive bent, you have much greater power to alter it, to
move it more in the positive direction.
Second, you must not only be aware of the role of your attitude but
also believe in its supreme power to alter your circumstances. You are
not a pawn in a game controlled by others; you are an active player
who can move the pieces at will and even rewrite the rules. View your
health as largely dependent on your attitude. Feeling excited and open
to adventure, you can tap into energy reserves you did not know that
you had. The mind and the body are one, and your thoughts affect your
physical responses. People can recover much more quickly from illness
through sheer desire and willpower. You are not born with fixed
intelligence and inherent limits. See your brain as a miraculous organ
designed for continual learning and improvement, well into old age.
The rich neural connections in your brain, your creative powers, are
something you develop to the degree that you open yourself up to new
experiences and ideas. View problems and failures as means to learn
and toughen yourself up. You can get through anything with
persistence. View the way people treat you as largely flowing from your
own attitude, something you can control.
Do not be afraid to exaggerate the role of willpower. It is an
exaggeration with a purpose. It leads to a positive self-fulfilling
dynamic, and that is all you care about. See this shaping of your
attitude as your most important creation in life, and never leave it to
chance.
The Constricted (Negative) Attitude
Life is inherently chaotic and unpredictable. The human animal,
however, does not react well to uncertainty. People who feel
particularly weak and vulnerable tend to adopt an attitude toward life
that narrows what they experience so that they can reduce the
possibility of unexpected events. This negative, narrowing attitude
often has its origins in early childhood. Some children have little
comfort or support in facing a frightening world. They develop various
psychological strategies to constrict what they have to see and
experience. They build up elaborate defenses to keep out other
viewpoints. They become increasingly self-absorbed. In most
situations they come to expect bad things to happen, and their goals in

[PAGE 241]
life revolve around anticipating and neutralizing bad experiences to
better control them. As they get older, this attitude becomes more
entrenched and narrower, making any kind of psychological growth
nearly impossible.
These attitudes have a self-sabotaging dynamic. Such people make
others feel the same negative emotion that dominates their attitude,
which helps confirm them in their beliefs about people. They do not
see the role that their own actions play, how they often are the
instigators of the negative response. They only see people persecuting
them, or bad luck overwhelming them. By pushing people away, they
make it doubly hard to have any success in life, and in their isolation
their attitude gets worse. They are caught in a vicious cycle.
The following are the five most common forms of the constricted
attitude. Negative emotions have a binding power—a person who is
angry is more prone to also feel suspicion, deep insecurities,
resentment, et cetera. And so we often find combinations of these
various negative attitudes, each one feeding and accentuating the
other. Your goal is to recognize the various signs of such attitudes that
exist in you in latent and weakened forms, and to root them out; to see
how they operate in a stronger version in other people, better
understanding their perspective on life; and to learn how to handle
people with such attitudes.
The Hostile Attitude. Some children exhibit a hostile attitude at
a very early age. They interpret weaning and the natural separation
from parents as hostile actions. Other children must deal with a parent
who likes to punish and inflict hurt. In both cases, the child looks out
on a world that seems fraught with hostility, and their answer is to seek
to control it by becoming the source of the hostility themselves. At least
then it is no longer so random and sudden. As they get older, they
become adept at stimulating anger and frustration in others, which
justifies their original attitude—“See, people are against me, I am
disliked, and for no apparent reason.”
In a relationship, a husband with a hostile attitude will accuse his
wife of not really loving him. If she protests and becomes defensive, he
will see this as a sign that she has to try hard to disguise the truth. If
she is intimidated into silence, he sees that as a sign that he was right
all along. In her confusion, she can easily begin to feel some hostility
on her part, confirming his opinion. People with this attitude have

[PAGE 242]
many other subtle tricks up their sleeve for provoking the hostility they
secretly want to feel directed at them—withdrawing their cooperation
on a project at just the wrong moment, constantly being late, doing a
poor job, deliberately making an unfavorable first impression. But they
never see themselves as playing any kind of role in instigating the
reaction.
Their hostility permeates everything they do—the way they argue
and provoke (they are always right); the nasty undertone of their jokes;
the greediness with which they demand attention; the pleasure they
get out of criticizing others and seeing them fail. You can recognize
them by how they are easily moved to anger in these situations. Their
life, as they describe it, is full of battles, betrayals, persecutions, but
seemingly not originating from them. In essence, they are projecting
their own hostile feelings onto other people and are primed to read
them in almost any apparently innocent action. Their goal in life is to
feel persecuted and to desire some form of revenge. Such types
generally have career problems, as their anger and hostility frequently
flare up. This gives them something else to complain about and a basis
on which to blame the world for being against them.
If you notice signs of this attitude in yourself, such self-awareness is
a major step toward being able to get rid of it. You can also try a simple
experiment: Approach people you are meeting for the first time, or
only know peripherally, with various positive thoughts—“I like them,”
“They seem smart,” et cetera. None of this is verbalized, but you do
your best to feel such emotions. If they respond with something hostile
or defensive, then perhaps the world is truly against you. More than
likely you will not see anything that could be remotely construed as
negative. In fact, you will see the opposite. Clearly, then, the source of
any hostile response is you.
In dealing with the extremes of this type, struggle as best you can to
not respond with the antagonism they expect. Maintain your
neutrality. This will confound them and temporarily put a stop to the
game they are playing. They feed off your hostility, so do not give them
fuel.
The Anxious Attitude. These types anticipate all kinds of
obstacles and difficulties in any situation they face. With people, they
often expect some sort of criticism or even betrayal. All of this
stimulates unusual amounts of anxiety before the fact. What they really

[PAGE 243]
fear is losing control of the situation. Their solution is to limit what can
possibly happen, to narrow the world they deal with. This means
limiting where they go and what they’ll attempt. In a relationship, they
will subtly dominate the domestic rituals and habits; they will seem
brittle and demand extra careful attention. This will dissuade people
from criticizing them. Everything must be on their terms. At work they
will be ferocious perfectionists and micromanagers, eventually
sabotaging themselves by trying to keep on top of too many things.
Once outside their comfort zone—the home or the relationship they
dominate—they become unusually fretful.
Sometimes they can disguise their need for control as a form of love
and concern. When Franklin Roosevelt came down with polio in 1921,
at the age of thirty-nine, his mother, Sara, did all she could to restrict
his life and keep him to one room in the house. He would have to give
up his political career and surrender to her care. Franklin’s wife,
Eleanor, knew him better. What he wanted and needed was to slowly
get back to something resembling his old life. It became a battle
between the mother and the daughter-in-law that Eleanor eventually
won. The mother was able to disguise her anxious attitude and need to
dominate her son through her apparent love, transforming him into a
helpless invalid.
Another disguise, similar to such love, is to seek to please and cajole
people in order to disarm any possible unpredictable and unfriendly
action. (See chapter 4, Toxic Types, The Pleaser.)
If you notice such tendencies in yourself, the best antidote is to pour
your energies into work. Focusing your attention outward into a
project of some sort will have a calming effect. As long as you rein in
your perfectionistic tendencies, you can channel your need to control
into something productive. With people, try to slowly open yourself to
their habits and pace of doing things, instead of the opposite. This can
show you that you have nothing to fear by loosening control.
Deliberately place yourself in the circumstances you most dread,
discovering that your fears are grossly exaggerated. You are slowly
introducing a bit of chaos into your overly ordered life.
In dealing with those with this attitude, try to not feel infected with
their anxiety, and instead try to provide the soothing influence they so
lacked in their earliest years. If you radiate calmness, your manner will
have greater effect than your words.

[PAGE 244]
The Avoidant Attitude. People with this attitude see the world
through the lens of their insecurities, generally related to doubts about
their competence and intelligence. Perhaps as children they were made
to feel guilty and uncomfortable with any efforts to excel and stand out
from siblings; or they were made to feel bad about any kind of mistake
or possible misbehavior. What they came to dread most was the
judgment of their parents. As these people get older, their main goal in
life is to avoid any kind of responsibility or challenge in which their
self-esteem might be at stake and for which they can be judged. If they
do not try too hard in life, they cannot fail or be criticized.
To enact this strategy they will constantly seek escape routes,
consciously or unconsciously. They will find the perfect reason for
leaving a job early and changing careers, or breaking off a relationship.
In the middle of some high-stakes project they will suddenly develop
an illness that will cause them to leave. They are prone to all kinds of
psychosomatic maladies. Or they become alcoholics, addicts of some
sort, always falling off the wagon at the right time but blaming this on
the “disease” they have, and their bad upbringing that caused their
addiction. If it weren’t for alcohol, they could’ve been a great writer or
entrepreneur, so they say. Other strategies will include wasting time
and starting too late on something, always with some built-in excuse
for why that happened. They then cannot be blamed for the mediocre
results.
These types find it hard to commit to anything, for a good reason. If
they remained at a job or in a relationship, their flaws might become
too apparent to others. Better to slip away at the right moment and
maintain the illusion—to themselves and to others—of their possible
greatness, if only . . . Although they are generally motivated by the
great fear of failing and the judgments that ensue, they are also secretly
afraid of success—for with success come responsibilities and the need
to live up to them. Success might also trigger their early fears about
standing out and excelling.
You can easily recognize such people by their checkered careers and
their short-term personal relationships. They may try to disguise the
source of their problems by seeming saintly—they look down on
success and people who have to prove themselves. Often they will
present themselves as noble idealists, propagating ideas that will never
come to pass but that will add to the saintly aura they wish to project.
Having to enact ideals might expose them to criticism or failure, so

[PAGE 245]
they choose those that are too lofty and unrealistic for the times they
live in. Do not be fooled by the holier-than-thou front they present.
Look at their actions, the lack of accomplishments, the great projects
they never start on, always with a good excuse.
If you notice traces of this attitude in yourself, a good strategy is to
take on a project of even the smallest scale, taking it all the way to
completion and embracing the prospect of failure. If you fail, you will
have already cushioned the blow because you anticipated it, and
inevitably it will not hurt as much as you had imagined. Your self-
esteem will rise because you finally tried something and finished it.
Once you diminish this fear, progress will be easy. You will want to try
again. And if you succeed, all the better. Either way, you win.
When you find others with this attitude, be very wary of forming
partnerships with them. They are masters at slipping away at the
wrong moment, at getting you to do all of the hard work and take the
blame if it fails. At all costs avoid the temptation to help or rescue them
from their negativity. They are too good at the avoidance game.
The Depressive Attitude. As children, these types did not feel
loved or respected by their parents. For helpless children, it is too
much to imagine that their parents could be wrong or flawed in their
parenting. Even if unloved, they still are dependent on them. And so
their defense is to often internalize the negative judgment and imagine
that they are indeed unworthy of being loved, that there is something
actually wrong with them. In this way they can maintain the illusion
that their parents are strong and competent. All of this occurs quite
unconsciously, but the feeling of being worthless will haunt such
people their entire lives. Deep down they will feel ashamed of who they
are and not really know why they feel this way.
As adults they will anticipate abandonment, loss, and sadness in
their experiences and see signs of potentially depressing things in the
world around them. They are secretly drawn to what is gloomy in the
world, to the seamy side of life. If they can manufacture some of the
depression they feel in this way, it at least is under their control. They
are consoled by the thought that the world is a dreary place. A strategy
they will employ throughout their lives is to temporarily withdraw
from life and from people. This will feed their depression and also
make it something they can manage to some extent, as opposed to
traumatic experiences imposed upon them.

[PAGE 246]
An excellent example of this type was the talented German
composer and conductor Hans von Bülow (1830–1894). In 1855 von
Bülow met and fell in love with Cosima Liszt (1837–1930), the
charismatic daughter of the composer Franz Liszt. Cosima was drawn
to von Bülow’s air of sadness. He lived with his domineering and
hostile mother, and Cosima had great sympathy for him. She wanted to
rescue von Bülow and transform him into a great composer. They were
soon married. As time went on, Cosima could see that he felt quite
inferior in relation to her intelligence and strong will. Soon he began to
question her love for him. He continually withdrew from her during his
bouts of depression. When she became pregnant, he suddenly
developed some mysterious ailment that prevented him from being
with her. Without warning he could become quite cold.
Feeling unloved and neglected, she began an affair with the famous
composer Richard Wagner, who was a friend and colleague of von
Bülow’s. Cosima had the feeling that von Bülow had unconsciously
encouraged their affair. When she eventually left von Bülow to live
with Wagner, von Bülow bombarded her with letters, blaming himself
for what had happened; he was unworthy of her love. He would then
go on about the bad turn in his career, his various illnesses, his suicidal
tendencies. Although he criticized himself, she could not help but feel
guilty and depressed for somehow being responsible. Recounting all of
his woes seemed like his subtle way of wounding her. She compared
each letter to “a sword twisted in my heart.” And they kept coming,
year after year, until he remarried and repeated the same pattern with
his new wife.
These types often have a secret need to wound others, encouraging
behavior such as betrayal or criticism that will feed their depression.
They will also sabotage themselves if they experience any kind of
success, feeling deep down that they don’t deserve it. They will develop
blocks in their work, or take criticism to mean they should not
continue with their career. Depressive types can often attract people to
them, because of their sensitive nature; they stimulate the desire to
want to help them. But like von Bülow, they will start to criticize and
wound the ones who wish to help, then withdraw again. This push and
pull causes confusion, but once under their spell it is hard to disengage
from them without feeling guilty. They have a gift for making other
people feel depressed in their presence. This gives them more fuel to
feed off.

[PAGE 247]
Most of us have depressive tendencies and moments. The best way
to handle them is to be aware of their necessity—they are our body’s
and mind’s way of compelling us to slow down, to lower our energies
and withdraw. Depressive cycles can serve positive purposes. The
solution is to realize their usefulness and temporary quality. The
depression you feel today will not be with you in a week, and you can
ride it out. If possible, find ways to elevate your energy level, which will
physically help lift you out of the mood. The best way to handle
recurrent depression is to channel your energies into work, especially
the arts. You are used to withdrawing and being alone; use such time
to tap into your unconscious. Externalize your unusual sensitivity and
your dark feelings into the work itself.
Never try to lift up depressive people by preaching to them about
the wonderfulness of life. Instead, it is best to go along with their
gloomy opinion of the world while subtly drawing them into positive
experiences that can elevate their moods and energy without any direct
appeal.
The Resentful Attitude. As children, these types never felt they
got enough parental love and affection—they were always greedy for
more attention. They carry this sense of dissatisfaction and
disappointment with them throughout their lives. They are never quite
getting the recognition they deserve. They are experts at scanning
people’s faces for signs of possible disrespect or disdain. They see
everything in relation to themselves; if someone has more than they
do, it is a sign of injustice, a personal affront. When they feel this lack
of respect and recognition, they do not explode in anger. They are
generally cautious and like to control their emotions. Instead, the hurt
incubates inside them, the sense of injustice growing stronger as they
reflect on this. They do not easily forget. At some point they will take
their revenge in some shrewdly plotted act of sabotage or passive
aggression.
Because they have a continual feeling of being wronged, they tend
to project this on to the world, seeing oppressors everywhere. In this
way, they often become the leader of those who feel disaffected and
oppressed. If such types get power, they can become quite vicious and
vengeful, finally able to vent their resentments on various victims. In
general, they carry themselves with an air of arrogance; they are above
others even if no one recognizes this. They carry their head a little too
high; they frequently have a slight smirk or look of disdain. As they get

[PAGE 248]
older, they are prone to pick petty battles, unable to completely contain
their resentments that have accumulated over time. Their bitter
attitude pushes a lot of people away, and so they often end up
congregating with others who have this attitude, as their form of
community.
The Roman emperor Tiberius (42 BC–AD 37) is perhaps the most
classic example of this type. As a child, his tutor noticed something
wrong with the boy. “He is a pitcher molded with blood and bile,” the
tutor once wrote to a friend. The writer Suetonius, who knew Tiberius,
described him as follows: “He carried himself with his head held
proudly high. . . . He was almost always silent, never saying a word
except now and again. . . . And even then he did so with extreme
reluctance, at the same time always making a disdainful gesture with
his fingers.” Emperor Augustus, his stepfather, had to continually
apologize to the Senate for “his displeasing manners, full of
haughtiness.” Tiberius hated his mother—she never loved him enough.
He never felt appreciated by Augustus, or his soldiers, or the Roman
people. When he became emperor, he slowly and methodically took
revenge on those who he felt had slighted him, and such revenge would
be cold and cruel.
As he got older, he became increasingly unpopular. His enemies
were legion. Feeling the hatred of his subjects, he retired to the island
of Capri, where he spent the last eleven years of his reign, almost
completely avoiding Rome. He was known to repeat to others in his
last years, “After me, let fire destroy the earth!” At his death Rome
exploded with celebration, the crowds voicing their feelings with the
famous phrase “Into the Tiber [River] with Tiberius!”
If you notice resentful tendencies within yourself, the best antidote
is to learn to let go of hurts and disappointments in life. It is better to
explode into anger in the moment, even it if it’s irrational, than to stew
on slights that you have probably hallucinated or exaggerated. People
are generally indifferent to your fate, not as antagonistic as you
imagine. Very few of their actions are really directed at you. Stop
seeing everything in personal terms. Respect is something that must be
earned through your achievements, not something given to you simply
for being human. You must break out of the resentful cycle by
becoming more generous toward people and human nature.

[PAGE 249]
In dealing with such types, you must exercise supreme caution.
Although they might smile and seem pleasant, they are actually
scrutinizing you for any possible insult. You can recognize them by
their history of past battles and sudden breaks with people, as well as
how easily they judge others. You might try to slowly gain their trust
and lower their suspicions; but be aware that the longer you are
around them, the more fuel you will give them for something to resent,
and their response can be quite vicious. Better to avoid this type if
possible.
The Expansive (Positive) Attitude
Some fifty years ago, many medical experts began to think of health in
a new and revolutionary way. Instead of focusing on specific problems,
such as digestion or skin ailments or the condition of the heart, they
decided it was much better to look at the human body as a whole. If
people improved their diet and their exercise habits, this would have a
beneficial effect on all of the organs, because the body is an
interconnected whole.
This seems obvious to us now, but such an organic way of thinking
has great application to our psychological health as well. Now more
than ever people focus on their specific problems—their depression,
their lack of motivation, their social inadequacies, their boredom. But
what governs all of these seemingly separate problems is our attitude,
how we view the world on a daily basis. It is how we see and interpret
events. Improve the overall attitude and everything else will elevate as
well—creative powers, the ability to handle stress, confidence levels,
relationships with people. It was an idea first promulgated in the 1890s
by the great American psychologist William James, but it remains a
revolution waiting to happen.
A negative, constricting attitude is designed to narrow down the
richness of life at the cost of our creative powers, our sense of
fulfillment, our social pleasures, and our vital energies. Without
wasting another day under such conditions, your goal is to break out,
to expand what you see and what you experience. You want to open the
aperture of the lens as wide as you can. Here is your road map.
How to view the world: See yourself as an explorer. With the gift
of consciousness, you stand before a vast and unknown universe that

[PAGE 250]
we humans have just begun to investigate. Most people prefer to cling
to certain ideas and principles, many of them adopted early on in life.
They are secretly afraid of what is unfamiliar and uncertain. They
replace curiosity with conviction. By the time they are thirty, they act
as if they know everything they need to know.
As an explorer you leave all that certainty behind you. You are in
continual search of new ideas and new ways of thinking. You see no
limits to where your mind can roam, and you are not concerned with
suddenly appearing inconsistent or developing ideas that directly
contradict what you believed a few months before. Ideas are things to
play with. If you hold on to them for too long, they become something
dead. You are returning to your childlike spirit and curiosity, from
before you had an ego and being right was more important than
connecting to the world. You explore all forms of knowledge, from all
cultures and time periods. You want to be challenged.
By opening the mind in this way, you will unleash unrealized
creative powers, and you will give yourself great mental pleasure. As
part of this, be open to exploring the insights that come from your own
unconscious, as revealed in your dreams, in moments of tiredness, and
in the repressed desires that leak out in certain moments. You have
nothing to be afraid of or to repress there. The unconscious is merely
one more realm for you to freely explore.
How to view adversity: Our life inevitably involves obstacles,
frustrations, pain, and separations. How we come to handle such
moments in our early years plays a large role in the development of our
overall attitude toward life. For many people, such difficult moments
inspire them to restrict what they see and experience. They go through
life trying to avoid any kind of adversity, even if this means never really
challenging themselves or getting much success in their careers.
Instead of learning from negative experiences, they want to repress
them. Your goal is to move in the opposite direction, to embrace all
obstacles as learning experiences, as means to getting stronger. In this
way you embrace life itself.
By 1928 the actress Joan Crawford had a reasonably successful
career in Hollywood, but she was feeling increasingly frustrated by the
limited roles she was receiving. She saw other less talented actresses
vault ahead of her. Perhaps the problem was that she was not assertive
enough. She decided she needed to voice her opinion to one of the

[PAGE 251]
most powerful production chiefs on the MGM lot, Irving Thalberg.
Little did she realize that Thalberg viewed this as impudence and that
he was vindictive by nature. He therefore cast her in a Western,
knowing that was the last thing she wanted and that such a fate was a
dead end for many an actress.
Joan had learned her lesson and decided to embrace her fate. She
made herself love the genre. She became an expert rider. She read up
on the Old West and became fascinated by its folklore. If that’s what it
took to get ahead, she decided to become the leading actress of
Westerns. At the very least this would expand her acting skills. This
became her lifelong attitude toward work and the supreme challenges
an actress faced in Hollywood, where careers were generally very short.
Every setback was a chance to grow and develop.
In 1946 twenty-year-old Malcolm Little (later known as Malcolm X)
began serving an eight-to-ten-year prison sentence for burglary. Prison
generally has the effect of hardening the criminal and narrowing his
already narrow view of the world. Instead, Malcolm decided to reassess
his life. He began to spend time in the prison library and fell in love
with books and learning. As he saw it now, prison afforded him the
best possible means of changing himself and his attitude toward life.
With so much time on his hands, he could study and earn himself a
degree. He could develop the discipline he had always been missing.
He could train himself to become an expert speaker. He embraced the
experience without any bitterness and emerged stronger than ever.
Once he left prison, he saw any difficulty, large or small, as a means to
test and toughen himself.
Although adversity and pain are generally beyond your control, you
have the power to determine your response and the fate that comes
from that.
How to view yourself: As we get older, we tend to place limits on
how far we can go in life. Over the years we internalize the criticisms
and doubts of others. By accepting what we think to be the limits of our
intelligence and creative powers, we create a self-fulfilling dynamic.
They become our limits. You do not need to be so humble and self-
effacing in this world. Such humility is not a virtue but is rather a value
that people promote to help keep you down. Whatever you are doing
now, you are in fact capable of much more, and by thinking that, you
will create a very different dynamic.

[PAGE 252]
In ancient times, many great leaders, such as Alexander the Great
and Julius Caesar, felt that they were descended from gods and part
divine. Such self-belief would translate into high levels of confidence
that others would feed off and recognize. It became a self-fulfilling
prophecy. You do not need to indulge in such grandiose thoughts, but
feeling that you are destined for something great or important will give
you a degree of resilience when people oppose or resist you. You will
not internalize the doubts that come from such moments. You will
have an enterprising spirit. You will continually try new things, even
taking risks, confident in your ability to bounce back from failures and
feeling destined to succeed.
When Chekhov had the epiphany about the ultimate freedom he
could create for himself, he had what the American psychologist
Abraham Maslow called a “peak experience.” These are moments in
which you are lifted out of the daily grind and you sense that there is
something larger and more sublime in life that you have been missing.
In the case of Chekhov it was sparked by a crisis, by loneliness, and it
led to the sensation of complete acceptance of people and the world
around him. These moments can come from exerting yourself past
what you thought were your limits; they can come from overcoming
great obstacles, climbing a mountain, taking a trip to a very different
culture, or the deep bonding that comes from any form of love. You
want to deliberately go in search of such moments, stimulate them if
you can. They have the effect, as they did with Chekhov, of altering
your attitude for good. They expand what you think about your
possibilities and about life itself, and the memory is something you will
always return to for supreme inspiration.
In general, this way of looking at yourself runs counter to the cool,
ironic attitude that many people like to assume in the postmodern
world—never too ambitious, never too positive about things or life,
always affecting a nonchalant and very false humility. Such types see
the positive, expansive attitude as Pollyannaish and simpleminded.
But really their cool attitude is a clever mask for their great fears—of
embarrassing themselves, of failing, of showing too much emotion. As
with all such trends in culture, the cool attitude will eventually fade
away, a remnant of the early twenty-first century. Moving in the
opposite direction, you are much more progressive.
How to view your energy and health: Although we are all
mortal and subject to illnesses beyond our control, we must recognize

[PAGE 253]
the role that willpower plays in our health. We have all felt this to some
degree or another. When we fall in love or feel excited by our work,
suddenly we have more energy and recover quickly from any illnesses.
When we are depressed or unusually stressed, we become prey to all
kinds of ailments. Our attitude plays an enormous role in our health,
one that science has begun to explore and will examine in more depth
in the coming decades. In general, you can safely push yourself beyond
what you think are your physical limits by feeling excited and
challenged by a project or endeavor. People get old and prematurely
age by accepting physical limits to what they can do, making it a self-
fulfilling cycle. Those who age well continue to engage in physical
activity, only moderately adjusted. You have wellsprings of energy and
health you have yet to tap into.
How to view other people: First you must try to get rid of the
natural tendency to take what people do and say as something
personally directed at you, particularly if what they say or do is
unpleasant. Even when they criticize you or act against your interests,
more often than not it stems from some deep earlier pain they are
reliving; you become the convenient target of frustrations and
resentments that have been accumulating over the years. They are
projecting their own negative feelings. If you can view people this way,
you will find it easier to not react and get upset or become embroiled in
some petty battle. If the person is truly malicious, by not becoming
emotional yourself you will be in a better place to plot the proper
countermove. You will save yourself from accumulating hurts and
bitter feelings.
See people as facts of nature. They come in all varieties, like flowers
or rocks. There are fools and saints and sociopaths and egomaniacs
and noble warriors; there are the sensitive and the insensitive. They all
play a role in our social ecology. This does not mean we cannot
struggle to change the harmful behavior of the people who are close to
us or in our sphere of influence; but we cannot reengineer human
nature, and even if we somehow succeeded, the result could be a lot
worse than what we have. You must accept diversity and the fact that
people are what they are. That they are different from you should not
be felt as a challenge to your ego or self-esteem but as something to
welcome and embrace.
From this more neutral stance, you can then try to understand the
people you deal with on a deeper level, as Chekhov did with his father.

[PAGE 254]
The more you do this, the more tolerant you will tend to become
toward people and toward human nature in general. Your open,
generous spirit will make your social interactions much smoother, and
people will be drawn to you.
—
Finally, think of the modern concept of attitude in terms of the ancient
concept of the soul. The concept of the soul is found in almost all
indigenous cultures and in premodern civilizations. It originally
referred to external spiritual forces permeating the universe and
contained in the individual human in the form of the soul. The soul is
not the mind or the body but rather the overall spirit we embody, our
way of experiencing the world. It is what makes a person an individual,
and the concept of the soul was related to the earliest ideas of
personality. Under this concept, a person’s soul could have depths.
Some people possessed a greater degree of this spiritual force, had
more of a soul. Others had a personality lacking in this force and were
somewhat soulless.
This has great relevance to our idea of the attitude. In our modern
conception of the soul, we replace this external spiritual force with life
itself, or what can be described as the life force. Life is inherently
complex and unpredictable, its powers far beyond anything we can
ever completely comprehend or control. This life force is reflected in
nature and human society by the remarkable diversity we find in both
realms.
On the one side we find people whose goal in life is to inhibit and
control this life force. This leads them to self-destructive strategies.
They have to limit their thoughts and remain true to ideas that have
lost their relevance. They have to limit what they experience.
Everything is about them and their petty needs and personal problems.
They often become obsessed with a particular goal that dominates all
of their thoughts—such as making money or getting attention. All of
this renders them dead inside as they close themselves off to the
richness of life and the variety of human experience. In this way they
veer toward the soulless, an internal lack of depth and flexibility.
Your goal must be to always move in the opposite direction. You
rediscover the curiosity you once had as a child. Everything and

[PAGE 255]
everyone is a source of fascination to you. You keep learning,
continually expanding what you know and what you experience. With
people you feel generous and tolerant, even with your enemies and
with those trapped in the soulless condition. You do not enslave
yourself to bitterness or rancor. Instead of blaming others or
circumstances, you see the role that your own attitude and actions
played in any failure. You adapt to circumstances instead of
complaining about them. You accept and embrace uncertainty and the
unexpected as valuable qualities of life. In this way, your soul expands
to the contours of life itself and fills itself with this life force.
Learn to measure the people you deal with by the depth of their
soul, and if possible associate as much as you can with those of the
expansive variety.
This is why the same external events or circumstances affect no two people
alike; even with perfectly similar surroundings every one lives in a world of
his own. . . . The world in which a man lives shapes itself chiefly by the way
in which he looks at it, and so it proves different to different men; to one it
is barren, dull, and superficial; to another rich, interesting, and full of
meaning. On hearing of the interesting events which have happened in the
course of a man’s experience, many people will wish that similar things had
happened in their lives too, completely forgetting that they should be
envious rather of the mental aptitude which lent those events the
significance they possess when he describes them.
—Arthur Schopenhauer

[PAGE 256]
9
Confront Your Dark Side
The Law of Repression
People are rarely who they seem to be. Lurking beneath their
polite, affable exterior is inevitably a dark, shadow side
consisting of the insecurities and the aggressive, selfish impulses they
repress and carefully conceal from public view. This dark side leaks
out in behavior that will baffle and harm you. Learn to recognize the
signs of the Shadow before they become toxic. See people’s overt traits
—toughness, saintliness, et cetera—as covering up the opposite
quality. You must become aware of your own dark side. In being
conscious of it you can control and channel the creative energies that
lurk in your unconscious. By integrating the dark side into your
personality, you will be a more complete human and will radiate an
authenticity that will draw people to you.
The Dark Side
On November 5, 1968, Republican Richard Nixon accomplished
perhaps the greatest comeback in American political history, narrowly
defeating his Democratic rival, Hubert Humphrey, to become the
thirty-seventh president of the United States. Only eight years earlier
he had lost his first attempt at the presidency to John F. Kennedy in a
devastating fashion. The election was extremely close, but clearly some
voting shenanigans in Illinois, orchestrated by the Democratic Party
machine in Chicago, played a role in his defeat. Two years later he lost
badly in the race to become the governor of California. Bitter at how
the press had hounded and provoked him throughout the race, he
addressed the media the day after this defeat and concluded by saying,
“Just think of how much you’re going to be missing. You won’t have

[PAGE 257]
Nixon to kick around anymore, because, gentlemen, this is my last
press conference.”
The response to these words was overwhelmingly negative. He was
accused of wallowing in self-pity. ABC News ran a half-hour special
called “The Political Obituary of Richard Nixon.” A Time magazine
article on him concluded: “Barring a miracle, Richard Nixon can never
hope to be elected to any political office again.”
By all accounts his political career should have been over in 1962.
But Richard Nixon’s life had been an endless series of crises and
setbacks that had only made him more determined. As a young man
his dream was to attend an Ivy League school, the key to attaining
power in America. Young Richard was exceptionally ambitious. His
family, however, was relatively poor and could not afford to pay for
such an education. He overcame this seemingly insuperable barrier by
transforming himself into a superior student, earning the nickname
“Iron Butt” for his inhuman work habits, and managed to land a
scholarship to the law school at Duke University. To keep the
scholarship he had to remain at the top of his class, which he did
through the kind of hard work few others could endure.
After several years in the U.S. Senate, in 1952 Dwight D.
Eisenhower had chosen him to be his running mate as vice president
on the Republican ticket, but quickly regretted the choice. Nixon had
kept a secret fund from the Republican Party that he had supposedly
used for private purposes. In fact he was innocent of the charges, but
Eisenhower did not feel comfortable with him, and this was the excuse
to get rid of him. Cutting him loose in this way would almost certainly
ruin Nixon’s political career. Once again he rose to the challenge,
appearing on live television and delivering the speech of his life,
defending himself against the charges. It was so effective, the public
clamored for Eisenhower to keep him on the ticket. He went on to
serve eight years as vice president.
And so, the crushing defeats of 1960 and 1962 would again be the
means of toughening himself up and resurrecting his career. He was
like a cat with nine lives. Nothing could kill him. He laid low for a few
years, then came charging back for the 1968 election. He was now the
“new Nixon,” more relaxed and affable, a man who liked bowling and
corny jokes. And having learned all the lessons from his various
defeats, he ran one of the smoothest and savviest campaigns in modern

[PAGE 258]
history and made all of his enemies and doubters eat crow when he
defeated Humphrey.
In becoming president, he had seemingly reached the apex of
power. But in his mind there was yet one more challenge to overcome,
perhaps the greatest of all. Nixon’s liberal enemies saw him as a
political animal, one who would resort to any kind of trickery to win an
election. To the East Coast elites who hated him, he was the hick from
Whittier, California, too obvious in his ambition. Nixon was
determined to prove them all wrong. He was not who they thought he
was. He was an idealist at heart, not a ruthless politician. His beloved
mother, Hannah, was a devout Quaker who had instilled in him the
importance of treating all people equally and promoting peace in the
world. He wanted to craft a legacy as one of the greatest presidents in
history. For the sake of his mother, who had died earlier that year, he
wanted to embody her Quaker ideals and show his detractors how
deeply they had misread him.
His political icons were men like French president Charles de
Gaulle, whom he had met and greatly admired. De Gaulle had crafted a
persona that radiated authority and love of country. Nixon would do
the same. In his notebooks he began to refer to himself as “RN”—the
world leader version of himself. RN would be strong, resolute,
compassionate yet completely masculine. The America he was to lead
was riven by antiwar protests, riots in the cities, a rising crime rate. He
would end the war and work toward world peace; at home he would
bring prosperity to all Americans, stand for law and order, and instill a
sense of decency the country had lost. Accomplishing this, he would
take his place among the presidents he revered—Abraham Lincoln and
Woodrow Wilson. And he would will this into existence, as he always
had done.
In his first months he moved quickly. He assembled a top-notch
cabinet, including the brilliant Henry Kissinger as his national security
adviser. For his personal staff he preferred clean-cut young men who
would be fiercely loyal to him and serve as tools to realize his great
ambitions for America. This would include Bob Haldeman, his chief of
staff; John Ehrlichman, in charge of domestic policy; John Dean, the
White House counsel; and Charles Colson, a White House aide.
He didn’t want intellectuals around him; he wanted go-getters. But
Nixon was not naive. He understood that in politics loyalty was

[PAGE 259]
ephemeral. And so early on in his administration he installed a secret
voice-activated taping system throughout the White House that only a
select few would know about. In this way he could keep discreet tabs
on his staff and preemptively discover any possible turncoats or
leakers among them. It would provide evidence he could use later on if
anyone tried to misrepresent any conversations with him. And best of
all, once his presidency was over, the edited tapes could be used to
demonstrate his greatness as a leader, the clear and rational way he
came to his decisions. The tapes would secure his legacy.
As the first few years went by, Nixon worked to execute his plan. He
was an active president. He signed bills to protect the environment, the
health of workers, and the rights of consumers. On the foreign front,
he struggled to wind down the war in Vietnam, with limited success.
But soon he laid the groundwork for his first visit to the Soviet Union
and his celebrated trip to China and signed into law an agreement with
the Soviets to limit the proliferation of nuclear weapons. This was just
the start of what he would bring about.
And yet despite the relative smoothness of these first years,
something strange began to stir within Richard Nixon. He could not
shake these feelings of anxiety, something he had been prone to his
entire life. It started to come out in his closed-door meetings with his
personal staff, late at night over some drinks. Nixon would begin to
share with them stories from his colorful past, and in the process he
would go over some of his old political wounds, and bitterness would
rise up from deep within.
He was particularly obsessed with the Alger Hiss case. Alger Hiss
was an important staffer in the State Department who in 1948 had
been accused of being a communist spy. Hiss denied the charges.
Dapper and elegant, he was the darling of the liberals. Nixon, at the
time a junior congressman from California, smelled a phony. While
other congressmen decided to leave Hiss alone, Nixon, representing
the House Un-American Activities Committee, kept investigating. In
an interview with Hiss, as Nixon reminded him of the law against
perjury, Hiss replied, “I am familiar with the law. I attended Harvard
Law School. I believe yours was Whittier?” (a reference to the lowly
undergraduate college Nixon had attended).
Relentless in his pursuit of Hiss, Nixon was successful in getting
him indicted for perjury, and Hiss went to prison. This victory made

[PAGE 260]
Nixon famous but, as he told his staff members, it earned him the
eternal wrath of East Coast elites, who saw him as the unctuous upstart
from Whittier. In the 1950s these elites, many of them Harvard
graduates, quietly kept Nixon and his wife, Pat, out of their social
circles, limiting Nixon’s political contacts. Their allies in the press
ridiculed him mercilessly for any misstatement or possible misdeed.
Yes, Nixon was no angel. He liked winning, but the hypocrisy of these
liberals galled him—Bobby Kennedy was the king of political dirty
tricks, and yet what reporter publicized this?
As he went deeper and deeper into these stories night after night
with his staff, he reminded them that this past was still very much
alive. The old enemies were still at work against him. There was CBS
correspondent Daniel Schorr, who seemed to hate Nixon with unusual
zeal. His reports from Vietnam always managed to highlight the worst
aspects of the war and make Nixon look bad. There was Katharine
Graham, the owner of the Washington Post, a newspaper that seemed
to have a personal vendetta against him going back many years. She
was the doyenne of the Georgetown social scene, which had snubbed
him and Pat for years. Worst of all, there was Larry O’Brien, now the
chairman of the Democratic Party, who as a key adviser in the Kennedy
administration had managed to get Nixon audited by the IRS. As
Nixon saw it, O’Brien was the evil genius of politics, a man who would
do anything to prevent Nixon’s reelection in 1972.
His enemies were everywhere and they were relentless—planting
negative stories in the press, procuring embarrassing leaks from within
the bureaucracy, spying on him, ready to pounce on the slightest whiff
of scandal. And what, he would ask his staff, are we doing on our side?
If his team did nothing to respond to this, they would have only
themselves to blame. His legacy, his ambitions were at stake. As the
stories began to pile up of antiwar demonstrations and leaks about his
administration’s Vietnam War effort, Nixon became red-hot with anger
and frustration, the talk with his staff heating up on both sides. Once,
as Colson talked about getting revenge on some particularly
nettlesome opponents, Nixon chimed in, “One day we will get them—
we’ll get them on the ground where we want them. And then we’ll stick
our heels in, step on them hard and twist—right, Chuck, right?”
When informed that many of the staff at the Bureau of Labor
Statistics were Jews, he felt that was probably the reason for some bad
economic numbers coming from there. “The government is full of

[PAGE 261]
Jews,” he told Haldeman. “Most Jews are disloyal.” They were the
mainstay of the East Coast establishment that worked so hard against
him. Another time he told Haldeman, “Please get me the names of the
Jews, you know, the big Jewish contributors to the Democrats. . . .
Could we please investigate some of the cocksuckers?” Auditing them
would be in order. He had other harsh ideas for how to hurt Katharine
Graham and embarrass Daniel Schorr.
Nixon also began to feel increasingly anxious about his public
image, so critical to his legacy. He badgered his staff, and even Henry
Kissinger, to promote to the press his strong leadership style. In
interviews, they should refer to him as Mr. Peace, and Kissinger should
not be getting so much credit. He wanted to know what the elites at the
parties in Georgetown were saying about him. Were they finally
changing their minds in any way about Richard Nixon?
Despite his nervousness, by 1972 it was clear that events were lining
up well for him. His Democratic opponent in his reelection bid would
be Senator George McGovern, a diehard liberal. Nixon was ahead in
the polls, but he wanted much more. He wanted a complete landslide
and mandate from the public. Certain that men like O’Brien had some
tricks up their sleeve, he began to rail at Haldeman to do some spying
and get some dirt on the Democrats. He wanted Haldeman to assemble
a team of “nutcutters” to do the necessary dirty work with maximum
efficiency. He would leave the details up to him.
Much to his chagrin, in June of that year Nixon read in the
Washington Post of a botched break-in at the Watergate Hotel, in
which a group of men had attempted to plant bugs in the offices of
Larry O’Brien. This led to the arrest of three men—James McCord, E.
Howard Hunt, and G. Gordon Liddy—with ties to the committee for
the reelection of President Nixon. The break-in was so badly done that
Nixon suspected it was all a setup by the Democrats. This was not the
efficient team of nutcutters he had advocated.
A few days later, on June 23, he discussed the break-in with
Haldeman. The FBI was investigating the case. Some of the men
arrested were former CIA operatives. Perhaps, Haldeman proposed,
they could get top brass in the CIA to put pressure on the FBI to drop
the investigation. Nixon approved. He told Haldeman, “I’m not going
to get that involved.” Haldeman responded, “No, sir. We don’t want
you to.” But Nixon then added, “Play it tough. That’s the way they play

[PAGE 262]
and that’s the way we’re going to play it.” Nixon put his counsel, John
Dean, in charge of the internal investigation, with clear instructions
that he should stonewall the FBI and cover up any connections to the
White House. Anyway, Nixon had never directly ordered the break-in.
Watergate was a trifle, nothing to tarnish his reputation. It would fade
away, along with all the other dirty political deeds never discovered or
recorded in the history books.
And indeed he was correct, for the time being—the public paid little
attention to the break-in. Nixon went on to have one of the biggest
landslides in electoral history. He swept every state except
Massachusetts and the District of Columbia. He even won over a large
percentage of Democrats. He now had four more years to solidify his
legacy and nothing to stop him. His popularity numbers had never
been higher.
Watergate, however, kept coming back to life and would not leave
him alone. In January 1973, the Senate decided to launch an
investigation. In March, McCord finally spilled the beans, implicating
various members of the White House staff in the ordering of the break-
in. Hunt began demanding hush money to not reveal what he knew.
The way out of this mess was simple and clear—hire an outside lawyer
to do an internal investigation of the break-in, with the full cooperation
of Nixon and his team, and bring all the details to light. Nixon’s
reputation would suffer, some would go to prison, but it would keep
him politically alive, and he was the master of coming back from the
dead.
Nixon, however, could not take such a step. There would be too
much immediate damage. The thought of coming clean about what he
knew and had ordered frightened him to death. In meetings with Dean
he continued to discuss the cover-up, even suggesting where they could
come up with hush money. Dean cautioned him to not get so involved,
but Nixon seemed oddly fascinated by the growing mess he had
created, and unable to pull himself away.
Soon he was forced to fire Haldeman and Ehrlichman, both of
whom had been deeply implicated in the break-in. It was an ordeal to
get him to personally fire them, and when it came to delivering the
news to Ehrlichman, he broke down and sobbed. But it seemed that
nothing he did could stop the momentum of the Watergate

[PAGE 263]
investigation, which got closer and closer to Nixon, making him feel
like a trapped rat.
On July 19, 1973, he received the worst news of all: the Senate
committee investigating Watergate had learned of the secret taping
system installed in the White House, and they demanded that the tapes
be handed over to them as evidence. All Nixon could think about was
the intense embarrassment that would ensue if the tapes went public.
They would make him the laughingstock of the world. Think of the
language that he had used and the many harsh things he had
advocated. His image, his legacy, all the ideals he had striven to realize,
it would all be ruined in one fell stroke. He thought of his mother and
his own family—they had never heard him speak as he had done in the
privacy of his own office. It was as if he were another person on those
tapes. Alexander Haig, who was now his chief of staff, told Nixon he
had to tear out the taping system and destroy the tapes immediately,
before receiving an official subpoena.
Nixon seemed paralyzed: Destroying the tapes would be an
admission of guilt; perhaps the tapes would exonerate him, as they
would prove he had never directly ordered the break-in. But the
thought of any of these tapes becoming public terrified him. He went
back and forth on this in his mind, but in the end he decided to not
destroy them. By invoking executive privilege he would resist handing
them over.
Finally, as pressure mounted, in April 1974 Nixon decided to release
edited transcripts of the tapes in the form of a 1,200-page book and
hope for the best. The public was horrified by what it read. Yes, many
had thought him slippery and devious, but the forceful language, the
swearing, the sometimes hysterical, paranoid tone of his conversation,
and the utter lack of compunction or hesitation in ordering various
illegal acts revealed a side of Nixon they had never suspected. Even
members of his family were shocked. When it came to Watergate, he
seemed very weak and indecisive, not at all the de Gaulle image he
wanted to project. He never once showed the slightest desire to get at
the truth and punish the wrongdoers. Where was the man of law and
order?
On July 24 came the final blow: the Supreme Court ordered him to
hand over the tapes themselves, and among them would be the
recorded conversation of June 23, 1972, in which he had approved of

[PAGE 264]
using the CIA to quash the FBI investigation. This was the “smoking
gun” that revealed his involvement in the cover-up from early on.
Nixon was doomed, and although it was against everything he believed
in, by early August he decided to resign.
The morning after he delivered his resignation speech to the
country, Nixon addressed his staff one last time, and fighting to control
his emotions, he concluded, “Never get discouraged, never be petty;
always remember, others may hate you, but those who hate you don’t
win unless you hate them, and then you destroy yourself.” Along with
his family, he then got into the helicopter that was to take him into
political exile.
• • •
Interpretation: For those who worked closely with Richard Nixon,
the man was an enigma. According to his chief speechwriter, Ray Price,
there were two Nixons, one light, one dark. The light Nixon was
“exceptionally considerate, exceptionally caring, sentimental, generous
of spirit, kind.” The dark Nixon was “angry, vindictive, ill-tempered,
mean-spirited.” He saw both sides as being “at constant war with one
another.” But perhaps the most perceptive observer of Nixon, the one
closest to figuring out the enigma, was Henry Kissinger, who made a
point of studying him closely so that he could manage and even play
him for his own purposes. And according to Kissinger, the key to Nixon
and his split personality must somehow lie in his childhood. “Can you
imagine,” Kissinger once observed, “what this man would have been
like if somebody had loved him?”
As an infant, Nixon seemed to be unusually needy. He was a
notorious crybaby; it took great effort to soothe him, and he was
continually bursting into sobs. He wanted more attention, more
fussing after him, and he was quite manipulative if he did not get these
things. His parents did not like this aspect of their child. Growing up in
the pioneer days of southern California, they preferred to have a stoic,
self-reliant child. Nixon’s father could be physically abusive and cold.
His mother was more caring but frequently depressed and very moody.
She had to deal with the business failures of her husband and two
sickly brothers of Richard who died at young ages. She had to
frequently leave Richard alone for months to attend to his brothers,
which Richard must have experienced as some kind of abandonment.

[PAGE 265]
In dealing with his difficult parents, the personality of Nixon was
formed. Seeking to overcome and disguise his vulnerabilities, he
created a persona that served him well, first with his family and later
with the public. For this persona he accentuated his own strengths and
developed new ones. He became supremely tough, resilient, fierce,
decisive, rational, and not someone to mess with, particularly in
debate. (According to Kissinger, “There was nothing he feared more
than to be thought weak.”) But the weak and vulnerable child within
does not miraculously disappear. If its needs have never been met or
dealt with, its presence sinks into the unconscious, into the shadows of
the personality, waiting to come out in strange ways. It becomes the
dark side.
With Nixon, whenever he experienced stress or unusual levels of
anxiety, this dark side would stir from deep within in the form of
potent insecurities (“nobody appreciates me”), suspicions (enemies
everywhere), sudden outbursts and tantrums, and powerful desires to
manipulate and harm those he believed had crossed him.
Nixon repressed and denied this side of himself with vehemence,
even up to the very end in his last words to his staff. He frequently told
people he never cried, or held grudges, or cared what others thought of
him—the opposite of the truth. For much of the time he played his role
well as RN. But when the shadow stirred, strange behavior emerged,
giving people who saw him on a regular basis the impression they were
indeed dealing with two Nixons. To Kissinger, it was like seeing the
unloved child come back to life.
Nixon’s dark side finally became something tangible in form of the
tapes. Nixon knew that everything he said was being recorded, and yet
he never held back or filtered what he was saying. He insulted close
friends behind their backs, indulged in wild bouts of paranoia and
revenge fantasies, waffled over the simplest decisions. He was a man
who greatly feared the slightest internal leak and suspected betrayal in
almost anyone around him, and yet he entrusted his fate to tapes that
he believed would never be made public in an unedited form. Even
when it seemed that they could become public and he was advised to
destroy them, he held on to them, mesmerized by this other Nixon that
had emerged. It was as if he secretly desired his own punishment, the
child and the dark side taking revenge for being so deeply denied.

[PAGE 266]
Understand: The story of Nixon is closer to you and your reality
than you might like to imagine. Like Nixon, you have crafted a public
persona that accentuates your strengths and conceals your weaknesses.
Like him, you have repressed the less socially acceptable traits you
naturally possessed as a child. You have become terribly nice and
pleasant. And like him, you have a dark side, one that you are loath to
admit or examine. It contains your deepest insecurities, your secret
desires to hurt people, even those close to you, your fantasies of
revenge, your suspicions about others, your hunger for more attention
and power. This dark side haunts your dreams. It leaks out in
moments of inexplicable depression, unusual anxiety, touchy moods,
sudden neediness, and suspicious thoughts. It comes out in offhand
comments you later regret.
And sometimes, as with Nixon, it even leads to destructive behavior.
You will tend to blame circumstances or other people for these moods
and behavior, but they keep recurring because you are unaware of their
source. Depression and anxiety come from not being your complete
self, from always playing a role. It requires great energy to keep this
dark side at bay, but at times unpleasant behavior leaks out as a way to
release the inner tension.
Your task as a student of human nature is to recognize and examine
the dark side of your character. Once subjected to conscious scrutiny, it
loses its destructive power. If you can learn to detect the signs of it in
yourself (see the following sections for help on this), you can channel
this darker energy into productive activity. You can turn your
neediness and vulnerability into empathy. You can channel your
aggressive impulses into worthwhile causes and into your work. You
can admit your ambitions, your desires for power, and not act so
guiltily and stealthily. You can monitor your suspicious tendencies and
the projection of your own negative emotions onto others. You can see
that selfish and harmful impulses dwell within you as well, that you are
not as angelic or strong as you imagine. With this awareness will come
balance and greater tolerance for others.
It might seem that only those who project continual strength and
saintliness can become successful, but that is not at all the case. By
playing a role to such an extent, by straining to live up to ideals that are
not real, you will emit a phoniness that others pick up. Look at great
public figures such as Abraham Lincoln and Winston Churchill. They
possessed the ability to examine their flaws and mistakes and laugh at

[PAGE 267]
themselves. They came across as authentically human, and this was the
source of their charm. The tragedy of Nixon was that he had immense
political talent and intelligence; if only he had also possessed the
ability to look within and measure the darker sides to his character. It
is the tragedy that confronts us all to the extent that we remain in deep
denial.
This longing to commit a madness stays with us throughout our lives. Who
has not, when standing with someone by an abyss or high up on a tower,
had a sudden impulse to push the other over? And how is it that we hurt
those we love although we know that remorse will follow? Our whole being
is nothing but a fight against the dark forces within ourselves. To live is to
war with trolls in heart and soul. To write is to sit in judgment on oneself.
—Henrik Ibsen
Keys to Human Nature
If we think about the people we know and see on a regular basis, we
would have to agree that they are usually quite pleasant and agreeable.
For the most part, they seem pleased to be in our company, are
relatively up-front and confident, socially responsible, able to work
with a team, take good care of themselves, and treat others well. But
every now and then with these friends, acquaintances, and colleagues,
we glimpse behavior that seems to contradict what we normally see.
This can come in several forms: Out of nowhere they make a
critical, even cruel comment about us, or express a rather harsh
assessment of our work or personality. Is this what they really feel and
were struggling to conceal? For a moment they are not so nice. Or we
hear of their unpleasant treatment of family or employees behind
closed doors. Or out of the blue they have an affair with the most
unlikely man or woman, and it leads to bad things. Or they put their
money in some absurd and risky financial scheme. Or they do
something rash that puts their career in jeopardy. Or we catch them in
some lie or manipulative act. We can also notice such moments of
acting out, or behaving against reputation, in public figures and
celebrities, who then go through lengthy apologies for the strange
moods that came over them.
What we glimpse in these moments is the dark side of their
character, what the Swiss psychologist Carl Jung called the Shadow.
The Shadow consists of all the qualities people try to deny about
themselves and repress. This repression is so deep and effective that

[PAGE 268]
people are generally unaware of their Shadow; it operates
unconsciously. According to Jung, this Shadow has a thickness to it,
depending on how deep the level of repression and the number of
traits that are being concealed. Nixon would be said to have a
particularly thick Shadow. When we experience those moments when
people reveal the dark side, we can see something come over their face;
their voice and body language is altered—almost as if another person is
confronting us, the features of the upset child suddenly becoming
visible. We feel their shadow as it stirs and emerges.
The Shadow lies buried deep within, but it becomes disturbed and
active in moments of stress, or when deep wounds and insecurities are
triggered. It also tends to emerge more as people get older. When we
are young, everything seems exciting to us, including the various social
roles we must play. But later in life we tire of the masks we have been
wearing, and the leakage is greater.
Because we rarely see the Shadow, the people we deal with are
somewhat strangers to us. It is as if we only see a two-dimensional,
flattened image of people—their pleasant social side. Knowing the
contours of their Shadow makes them come to life in three dimensions.
This ability to see the rounded person is a critical step in our
knowledge of human nature. Armed with this knowledge, we can
anticipate people’s behavior in moments of stress, understand their
hidden motives, and not get dragged under by any self-destructive
tendencies.
The Shadow is created in our earliest years and stems from two
conflicting forces that we felt. First, we came into this world bursting
with energy and intensity. We did not understand the difference
between acceptable and unacceptable behavior; we only experienced
natural impulses. Some of these impulses were aggressive. We wanted
to monopolize our parents’ attention and receive much more of it than
our siblings. We experienced moments of great affection but also
powerful dislikes and hatreds, even of our parents for not meeting our
needs. We wanted to feel superior in some way and appreciated for it—
in appearance, strength, or smartness. We could be remarkably selfish
if we were denied what we wanted, and turn devious and manipulative
to get it. We could even find some pleasure in hurting people, or
fantasize about getting revenge. We experienced and expressed the full
gamut of emotions. We were not the innocent angels people imagine
children to be.

[PAGE 269]
At the same time, we were completely vulnerable and dependent on
our parents for survival. This dependence lasted for many years. We
watched our parents with eagle eyes, noting every signal of approval
and disapproval on their faces. They would chastise us for having too
much energy and wish we could sit still. They sometimes found us too
willful and selfish. They felt that other people were judging them by the
behavior of their children, so they wanted us to be nice, to put on a
show for others, to act like the sweet angel. They urged us to be
cooperative and play fairly, even though at times we wished to behave
differently. They encouraged us to tone down our needs, to be more of
what they needed in their stressful lives. They actively discouraged our
tantrums and any form of acting out.
As we got older, these pressures to present a particular front came
from other directions—peers and teachers. It was fine to show some
ambition, but not too much of it or we might seem antisocial. We could
exude confidence, but not too much or we would seem to be asserting
our superiority. The need to fit into the group became a primary
motivation, and so we learned to tamp down and restrain the dark side
of our personality. We internalized all of the ideals of our culture—
being nice, having prosocial values. Much of this is essential for the
smooth functioning of social life, but in the process a large part of our
nature moved underground, into the Shadow. (Of course, there are
some who never learned to control these darker impulses and end up
acting them out in real life—the criminals in our midst. But even
criminals struggle to appear nice a great deal of the time and justify
their behavior.)
Most of us succeed in becoming a positive social animal, but at a
price. We end up missing the intensity that we experienced in
childhood, the full gamut of emotions, and even the creativity that
came with this wilder energy. We secretly yearn to recapture it in some
way. We are drawn toward what is outwardly forbidden—sexually or
socially. We may resort to alcohol or drugs or any stimulant, because
we feel our senses dulled, our minds too restrained by convention. If
we accumulate a lot of hurts and resentments along the way, which we
strive to conceal from others, the Shadow grows thicker. If we
experience success in our lives, we become addicted to positive
attention, and in the inevitable down moments when the drug of such
attention wears off, the Shadow will be disturbed and activated.

[PAGE 270]
Concealing this dark side requires energy; it can be draining to
always present such a nice, confident front. And so the Shadow wants
to release some of the inner tension and come back to life. As the poet
Horace once said, Naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret
(“You can throw out Nature with a pitchfork, but she’ll always come
back”). You must become adept at recognizing such moments of
release in others and interpreting them, seeing the outlines of the
Shadow that now come forward. The following are some of the most
notable signs of such release.
Contradictory behavior: This is the most eloquent sign of all. It
consists of actions that belie the carefully constructed front that people
present. For instance, a person who preaches morals is suddenly
caught out in a very compromising situation. Or someone with a tough
exterior reveals insecurities and hysteria at the wrong moment. Or a
person who preaches free love and open behavior suddenly becomes
quite domineering and authoritarian. The strange, contradictory
behavior is a direct expression of the Shadow. (For more on such signs
and how to interpret them, see the section on this page.)
Emotional outbursts: A person suddenly loses his or her
habitual self-control and sharply expresses deep resentments or says
something biting and hurtful. In the aftermath of such a release, they
may blame it on stress; they may say they did not mean any of it, when
in fact the opposite is the case—the Shadow has spoken. Take what
they said at face value. On a less intense level, people may suddenly
become unusually sensitive and touchy. Some of their deepest fears
and insecurities from childhood have somehow become activated, and
this makes them hyperalert to any possible slight and ripe for smaller
outbursts.
Vehement denial: According to Freud, the only way that
something unpleasant or uncomfortable in our unconscious can reach
the conscious mind is through active denial. We express the very
opposite of what is buried within. This could be a person fulminating
against homosexuality, when in fact he or she feels the opposite. Nixon
engaged in such denials frequently, as when he told others, in the
strongest terms, that he never cried, or held grudges, or gave in to
weakness, or cared what people thought of him. You must reinterpret
the denials as positive expressions of Shadow desires.

[PAGE 271]
“Accidental” behavior: People might talk of quitting some
addiction, or not working so damned hard, or staying away from a self-
destructive relationship. They then fall into the behavior they spoke of
trying to avoid, blaming it on an uncontrollable illness or dependency.
This salves their conscience for indulging their dark side; they simply
can’t help it. Ignore the justifications and see the Shadow operating
and releasing. Also remember that when people are drunk and behave
differently, often it is not the alcohol that is speaking but the Shadow.
Overidealization: This can serve as one of the most potent covers
for the Shadow. Let us say we believe in some cause, such as the
importance of transparency in our actions, particularly in politics. Or
we admire and follow the leader of just such a cause. Or we decide that
some new type of financial investment—mortgage-backed securities,
for instance—represents the latest and most sophisticated path to
wealth. In these situations we go much further than simple
enthusiasm. We are charged with powerful conviction. We gloss over
any faults, inconsistencies, or possible downsides. We see everything
in black-and-white terms—our cause is moral, modern, and
progressive; the other side, including doubters, is evil and reactionary.
We now feel sanctioned to do everything for the cause—lie, cheat,
manipulate, spy, falsify scientific data, get revenge. Anything the leader
does is justified. In the case of the investment, we feel justified in
taking what normally would be seen as great risks, because this time
the financial tool is different and new, not subject to the usual rules.
We can be as greedy as we like without worrying about the
consequences.
We tend to be dazzled by the strength of people’s convictions and
interpret excessive behavior as simply overzealousness. But we should
look at it in another light. By overidealizing a cause, person, or object,
people can give free rein to the Shadow. That is their unconscious
motivation. The bullying, the manipulations, the greed that comes out
for the sake of the cause or product should be taken at face value, the
overly strong conviction providing simple cover for repressed emotions
to play themselves out.
Related to this, in arguments people will use their powerful
convictions as a perfect way to disguise their desires to bully and
intimidate. They trot out statistics and anecdotes (which can always be
found) to buttress their case, then proceed to insult or impugn our

[PAGE 272]
integrity. It’s just an exchange of ideas, they say. Pay attention to the
bullying tone, and do not be fooled. Intellectuals might be subtler.
They will lord it over us with obscure language and ideas we cannot
decode, and we are made to feel inferior for our ignorance. In all cases,
see this as repressed aggression finding a way to leak out.
Projection: This is by far the most common way of dealing with
our Shadow, because it offers almost daily release. We cannot admit to
ourselves certain desires—for sex, for money, for power, for superiority
in some area—and so instead we project those desires onto others.
Sometimes we simply imagine and completely project these qualities
out of nothing, in order to judge and condemn people. Other times we
find people who express such taboo desires in some form, and we
exaggerate them in order to justify our dislike or hatred.
For instance, we accuse another person in some conflict of having
authoritarian desires. In fact, they are simply defending themselves.
We are the ones who secretly wish to dominate, but if we see it in the
other side first, we can vent our repressed desire in the form of a
judgment and justify our own authoritarian response. Let us say we
repressed early on assertive and spontaneous impulses so natural to
the child. Unconsciously we wish to have back such qualities, but we
cannot overcome our internal taboos. We look out for those who are
less inhibited, more assertive and open with their ambition. We
exaggerate these tendencies. Now we can despise them, and in
thinking about them, give vent to what we cannot admit to ourselves or
about ourselves.
The great nineteenth-century German composer Richard Wagner
frequently expressed anti-Semitic sentiments. He blamed Jews for
ruining Western music with their eclectic tastes, sentimentality, and
emphasis on technical brilliance. He yearned for a more pure German
music, which he would create. Most of what he blamed Jews for in
music was completely made up. Yet Wagner, strangely enough, had
many of the same qualities that he seemed to hate in Jews. His tastes
were quite eclectic. He had sentimental tendencies. Many of the
pianists and conductors he worked with were Jewish, because of their
technical proficiency.
Remember: behind any vehement hatred is often a secret and very
unpalatable envy of the hated person or people. It is only through such
hate that it can be released from the unconscious in some form.

[PAGE 273]
Consider yourself a detective when it comes to piecing together
people’s Shadow. Through the various signs you pick up, you can fill in
the outlines of their repressed desires and impulses. This will allow you
to anticipate future leakage and odd Shadow-like behavior. Rest
assured such behavior never occurs just once, and it will tend to pop
up in different areas. If, for instance, you pick up bullying tendencies
in the way someone argues, you will also see it in other activities.
You might entertain the notion that this concept of the Shadow is
somewhat antiquated. After all, we live in a much more rational,
scientifically oriented culture today. People are more transparent and
self-aware than ever, we might say. We are much less repressed than
our ancestors, who had to deal with all sorts of pressures from
organized religion. The truth, however, might very well be the
opposite. In many ways we are more split than ever between our
conscious, social selves and our unconscious Shadow. We live in a
culture that enforces powerful codes of correctness that we must abide
by or face the shaming that is now so common on social media. We are
supposed to live up to ideals of selflessness, which are impossible for
us because we are not angels. All of this drives the dark side of our
personalities even further underground.
We can read signs of this in how deeply and secretly we are all
drawn to the dark side in our culture. We thrill at watching shows in
which various Machiavellian characters manipulate, deceive, and
dominate. We lap up stories in the news of those who have been caught
acting out in some way and enjoy the ensuing shaming. Serial killers
and diabolical cult leaders enthrall us. With these shows and the news
we can always become moralistic and talk of how much we despise
such villains, but the truth is that the culture constantly feeds us these
figures because we are hungry for expressions of the dark side. All of
this provides a degree of release from the tension we experience in
having to play the angel and seem so correct.
These are relatively harmless forms of release, but there are more
dangerous ones, particularly in the realm of politics. We find ourselves
increasingly drawn to leaders who give vent to this dark side, who
express the hostility and resentment we all secretly feel. They say
things we would dare not say. In the safety of the group and rallied to
some cause, we have license to project and vent our spleen on various
convenient scapegoats. By idealizing the leader and the cause, we are
now free to act in ways we would normally shy away from as

[PAGE 274]
individuals. These demagogues are adept at exaggerating the threats
we face, painting everything in black-and-white terms. They stir up the
fears, insecurities, and desires for revenge that have gone underground
but are waiting at any moment to explode in the group setting. We will
find more and more such leaders as we experience greater degrees of
repression and inner tension.
The writer Robert Louis Stevenson expressed this dynamic in the
novel The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, published in
1886. The main character, Dr. Jekyll, is a well-respected and wealthy
doctor/scientist with impeccable manners, so much like the paragons
of goodness in our culture. He invents a concoction that transforms
him into Mr. Hyde, the embodiment of his Shadow, who proceeds to
murder and rape and indulge in the wildest of sensual pleasures.
Stevenson’s idea is that the more civilized and moral we outwardly
become, the more potentially dangerous is the Shadow, which we so
fiercely deny. As the character Dr. Jekyll describes it, “My devil had
long been caged, he came out roaring.”
The solution is not more repression and correctness. We can never
alter human nature through enforced niceness. The pitchfork doesn’t
work. Nor is the solution to seek release for our Shadow in the group,
which is volatile and dangerous. Instead the answer is to see our
Shadow in action and become more self-aware. It is hard to project
onto others our own secret impulses or to overidealize some cause,
once we are made aware of the mechanism operating within us.
Through such self-knowledge we can find a way to integrate the dark
side into our consciousness productively and creatively. (For more on
this, see the last section of this chapter.) In doing so we become more
authentic and complete, exploiting to the maximum the energies we
naturally possess.
Deciphering the Shadow: Contradictory Behavior
In the course of your life you will come upon people who have very
emphatic traits that set them apart and seem to be the source of their
strength—unusual confidence, exceptional niceness and affability,
great moral rectitude and a saintly aura, toughness and rugged
masculinity, an intimidating intellect. If you look closely at them, you
may notice a slight exaggeration to these traits, as if they were
performing or laying it on just a little too thick. As a student of human

[PAGE 275]
nature, you must understand the reality: the emphatic trait generally
rests on top of the opposite trait, distracting and concealing it from
public view.
We can see two forms of this: Early on in life some people sense a
softness, vulnerability, or insecurity that might prove embarrassing or
uncomfortable. They unconsciously develop the opposite trait, a
resilience or toughness that lies on the outside like a protective shell.
The other scenario is that a person has a quality that they feel might be
antisocial—for instance, too much ambition or an inclination to be
selfish. They develop the opposite quality, something very prosocial.
In both cases, over the years they hone and perfect this public
image. The underlying weakness or antisocial trait is a key component
of their Shadow—something denied and repressed. But as the laws of
human nature dictate, the deeper the repression, the greater the
volatility of the Shadow. As they get older or experience stress, there
will be cracks in the façade. They are playing a role to the extreme, and
it is tiring. Their real self will rebel in the form of moods, obsessions,
secret vices, and behavior that is quite contrary to their image and is
often self-destructive.
Your task is simple: be extra wary around people who display such
emphatic traits. It is very easy to get caught up in the appearance and
first impression. Watch for the signs and emergence of the opposite
over time. It is much easier to deal with such types once you
understand them. The following are seven of the most common
emphatic traits that you must learn to recognize and manage
appropriately.
The Tough Guy: He projects a rough masculinity that is intended
to intimidate. He has a swagger and an air that signals he is not to be
messed with. He tends to boast about past exploits—the women he has
conquered, the brawls, the times he’s outnegotiated opponents.
Although he seems extremely convincing in telling such stories, they
feel exaggerated, almost hard to believe. Do not be fooled by
appearances. Such men have learned to conceal an underlying
softness, an emotional vulnerability from deep within that terrifies
them. On occasion you will see this sensitive side—they may cry, or
have a tantrum, or suddenly show compassion. Embarrassed by this,
they will quickly cover it up with a tough or even cruel act or comment.

[PAGE 276]
For the baseball player Reggie Jackson, Yankees manager Billy
Martin was just such a brawling type. Jackson could recognize the
softness behind the bluster in Martin’s touchiness when it came to his
ego, his changing moods (not very masculine), and emotional
outbursts that revealed glaring insecurities. Such men will often make
terrible decisions under the impact of the emotions that they have tried
to conceal and repress but that inevitably surface. Although they like to
dominate women, they will often end up with a wife who clearly
dominates them, a secret wish of theirs.
You must not let yourself be intimidated by the front, but also be
careful to not stir up their deep insecurities by seeming to doubt their
tall tales or masculine nature. They are notoriously touchy and thin-
skinned, and you might detect a micropout on their face if you trigger
their insecurities, before they cover it up with a fierce scowl. If they
happen to be a rival, they are easy to bait into an overreaction that
reveals something less than tough.
The Saint: These people are paragons of goodness and purity.
They support the best and most progressive causes. They can be very
spiritual if that is the circle they travel in; or they are above the
corruption and compromises of politics; or they have endless
compassion for every type of victim. This saintly exterior developed
early on as a way to disguise their strong hunger for power and
attention or their strong sensual appetites. The irony is that often by
projecting this saintly aura to the nth degree they will gain great
power, leading a cult or political party. And once they are in power, the
Shadow will have space to operate. They will become intolerant, railing
at the impure, punishing them if necessary. Maximilien Robespierre
(nicknamed the Incorruptible), who rose to power in the French
Revolution, was just such a type. Under his reign, the guillotine was
never busier.
They are also secretly drawn to sex, to money, to the limelight, and
to what is expressly taboo for their particular saintliness. The strain
and the temptations are too much—they are the gurus who sleep with
their students. They will appear the saint in public, but their family or
spouse will see the demonic side in private. (See the story of the
Tolstoys in