chapter
15 for more on this). Danton gained power by how far he went in

chapter
15 for more on this). Danton gained power by how far he went in
defying the monarchy and fomenting for the republic. In the 1920s, the
African American dancer Josephine Baker came to exemplify the new
spirit of spontaneity among the lost generation by making her
performances as unfettered and shocking as possible. By breaking so
deeply with the past images of previous first ladies and their usual
demure manner, Jacqueline Kennedy became the icon for the new
spirit of the early 1960s. In going further in this direction, you create a
shock of the new and spark desires among others that are waiting to
come out.
Adapt the past to the present spirit. Once you identify the essence of the
zeitgeist, it is often a wise strategy to find some analogous moment or
period in history. The frustrations and rebellions of your generation
were certainly felt to some degree by some previous generation and
were expressed in dramatic fashion. The leaders of such past
generations resonate through history and take on a kind of mythic hue
the more time passes. By associating yourself with those figures or
times, you can give added weight to whatever movement or innovation
you are promoting. You take some of the emotionally loaded symbols
and styles of that historical period and adapt them, giving the
impression that what you are attempting in the present is a more
perfect and progressive version of what happened in the past.
In doing this, think in grand, mythic terms. Danton associated
himself with Cicero, whose speeches and actions in favor of the Roman
Republic and against tyranny naturally resonated with many French
people and gave Danton’s mission the added weight of the ancient

[PAGE 606]
past. The filmmaker Akira Kurosawa brought back to life the world of
the samurai warrior, so celebrated in Japanese culture, but re-created
it in such a way as to make judicious comments on the issues and
moods of postwar Japan. When running for president, John F.
Kennedy wanted to herald a new American spirit that was moving past
the staleness of the 1950s. He called the programs he would initiate the
New Frontier, associating his ideas with the pioneer spirit so
reverentially ingrained in the American psyche. Such imagery became
a powerful part of his appeal.
Resurrect the spirit of childhood. By bringing to life the spirit of your
early years—its humor, its decisive historical events, the styles and
products of the period, the feeling in the air as it affected you—you will
reach a vast audience of all those who experienced those years in a
similar way. It was a time of life of great emotional intensity, and by re-
creating it in some form, but reflected through the eyes of an adult,
your work will resonate with your peers. You must use this strategy
only if you feel a particularly powerful connection to your childhood.
Otherwise your attempt to re-create the spirit will seem flat and
contrived.
Keep in mind that you are not aiming for a literal re-creation of the
past but capturing its spirit. To have real power, it should connect to
some issue or problem in the present and not simply be some mindless
bit of nostalgia. If you are inventing something, try to update and
incorporate the styles of that childhood period in a subtle manner,
exploiting the unconscious attraction we all feel to that early period in
life.
Create the new social configuration. It is human nature for people to
crave more social interaction with those with whom they feel an
affinity. You will always gain great power by forging some new way of
interacting that appeals to your generation. You organize a group
around new ideas or values that are in the air or the latest technology
that allows you to bring people together of a like mind in a novel way.
You eliminate the middlemen who used to set up barriers that
prevented freer associations of people. In this new form of a group, it is
always wise to introduce some rituals that bond the members together
and some symbols to identify with.
We see many examples of this in the past—the salons of
seventeenth-century France, where men and women could talk freely

[PAGE 607]
and openly; the lodges of the Freemasons in eighteenth-century
Europe, with their secret rituals and air of subversion; the speakeasies
and jazz clubs of the 1920s, where the mood was “anything goes”; or
more recently, online platforms and groups, or flash mobs. In using
this strategy, think of the repressive elements of the past that people
are yearning to shake free of. This could be a period of stultifying
correctness or prudery, or rampant conformity, or the overvaluing of
individualism and all the selfishness that breeds. The group you
establish will let flourish a new spirit and even offer the thrill of
breaking past taboos on correctness.
Subvert the spirit. You might find yourself at odds with some part of
the spirit of your generation or the times you live in. Perhaps you
identify with some tradition in the past that has been superseded, or
your values differ in some way because of your own individual
temperament. Whatever the reason, it is never wise to preach or
moralize or condemn the spirit of the times. You will only marginalize
yourself. If the spirit of the times is like a tide or a stream, better to
find a way to gently redirect it, instead of fighting its direction. You will
have more power and effect by working within the zeitgeist and
subverting it.
For instance, you make something—a book, a film, any product—
that has the look and feel of the times, even to an exaggerated degree.
However, through the content of what you produce, you insert ideas
and a spirit that is somewhat different, that points to the value of the
past you prefer or depicts another possible way of relating to events or
interpreting them, helping to loosen up the tight generational
framework through which people view their world.
After World War II, the great European fashion designers felt a
great deal of disdain for the American market that now dominated the
world. They disliked the emerging popular culture and its vulgarity.
The fashion designer Coco Chanel had always emphasized elegance in
her designs and certainly shared some of this antipathy. But she went
in the opposite direction of other designers of the time: she embraced
the new power of American women and catered to their desire for
clothing that was less fussy and more athletic. Gaining their trust and
using their language, Chanel now had great power to subtly alter
American tastes, bringing in more of her true sensibility and imparting
some elegance to the streamlined designs American women loved. In
this way she helped redirect the zeitgeist in fashion, anticipating the

[PAGE 608]
changes of the early 1960s. That is the power that comes from working
with the spirit rather than against it.
Keep adapting. It was in your youth that your generation forged its
particular spirit, a period of emotional intensity that we often
remember fondly. The problem that you face is that as you get older,
you tend to remain locked in the values, ideas, and styles that marked
this period. You become a kind of caricature of the past to those who
are younger. You stop evolving with your thinking. The times leave you
behind, which only makes you hold on more tightly to the past as your
only anchor. And as you age, and more and more young people occupy
the public stage, you narrow your audience.
It is not that you should abandon the spirit that marked you, a
rather impossible task anyway. Trying to ape the styles of the younger
generation will only make you seem ludicrous and inauthentic. What
you want is to modernize your spirit, to possibly adopt some of the
values and ideas of the younger generation that appeal to you, gaining
a new and wider audience by blending your experience and perspective
with the changes going on, making yourself into an unusual and
appealing hybrid.
For the film director Alfred Hitchcock, the decade that shaped him
and his work was the 1920s, when he entered the industry and became
a director. What mattered most in these silent films was perfecting a
visual language for telling a story. Hitchcock mastered the art of using
camera angles and movement to make the audience feel as if it were in
the middle of the story.
He never abandoned this obsession with visual language
throughout the six decades he worked as a director, but he continually
adapted his style—to the color spectacles so much in vogue in the
1950s and to the popular thrillers and horror films of the sixties and
seventies. Unlike other aging film directors, who either fell completely
out of fashion or simply tried to mimic the current style, Hitchcock
created a hybrid of the past and the present. This gave his later films
tremendous depth, as he had incorporated all of the adaptations from
earlier in his career. His films could have mass appeal, but they were
made unique by these layers of innovations embedded in the film.
Such depth will always have an uncanny effect on any audience, as
your work seems beyond time itself.

[PAGE 609]
The Human Beyond Time and Death
We humans are masters of transforming whatever we get our hands
on. We have completely transformed the environment of the planet
Earth to suit our purposes. We have transformed ourselves from a
physically weak species into the preeminent and most powerful social
animal, effectively enlarging and rewiring our brains as we did so. We
are restless and endlessly inventive. But one area seems to defy our
transformational powers—time itself. We are born and enter the
stream of life, and each day it carries us closer to death. Time is linear,
always advancing, and there is nothing we can do to stop its course.
We move through the various phases of life, which mark us
according to patterns beyond our control. Our bodies and minds slow
down and lose their youthful elasticity. We watch helplessly as more
and more young people fill the stage of life, pushing us to the side. We
are born into a period of history and into a generation that are not of
our choice and that seem to determine so much of who we are and
what happens to us. In relation to time, our active nature is
neutralized, and although we do not consciously register this, our
helplessness here is the source of much of our anxiety and bouts of
depression.
If we look more closely, however, at our personal experience of
time, we can notice something peculiar—the passage of the hours or
days can alter depending on our mood and circumstances. A child and
an adult experience time very differently—for the former it moves
rather slowly, and all too quickly for the latter. When we are bored,
time feels empty and grinds to a crawl; when we are excited and
enjoying ourselves, we wish it would slow down. When we are calm
and meditative, the time might pass slowly, but it seems full and
satisfying.
What this means in general is that time is a human creation, a way
for us to measure its passage for our own purposes, and our experience
of this artificial creation is quite subjective and changeable. We have
the power to consciously slow it down or speed it up. Our relationship
to time is more malleable than we think. Although we cannot stop the
aging process or defy the ultimate reality of death, we can alter the
experience of them, transforming what is painful and depressing into
something much different. We can make time feel more cyclical than
linear; we can even step outside the stream and experience forms of

[PAGE 610]
timelessness. We do not have to remain locked in the hold of our
generation and its perspective.
Although this might seem like wishful thinking, we can point to
various historical figures—Leonardo da Vinci and Johann Wolfgang
von Goethe, to name two—who consciously transcended their era and
described their transformed experience of time. It is an ideal, one that
our active nature allows for, and one well worth aiming to realize to
some degree.
Here’s how we could apply this active approach to four elemental
aspects of time.
The phases of life: As we pass through the phases of life—youth,
emerging adult, middle age, and old age—we notice certain common
changes in us. In our youth we experience life more intensely. We are
more emotional and vulnerable. Most of us tend to be outwardly
focused, concerned with what people might think of us and with how
we fit in. We are more gregarious but prone to foolish behavior and
self-righteousness.
As we get older, the intensity diminishes, our minds tend to tighten
up around certain conventional ideas and beliefs. We slowly become
less concerned with what people think of us, and thus more inwardly
directed. What we sometimes gain in these later phases is some
distance from life, some self-control, and perhaps the wisdom that
comes from accumulating experiences.
We have the power, however, to drop or mitigate the negative
qualities that often go with certain phases of life, in a way defying the
aging process itself. For instance, when we are young, we can make a
point of lessening the influence of the group on us and not being so
fixated on what others are thinking and doing. We can make ourselves
more inwardly directed, more in harmony with our uniqueness (see