chapter 13 for more on this). We can consciously develop more of that

chapter 13 for more on this). We can consciously develop more of that
inner distance that comes naturally with the years, think more deeply
about our experiences, learn the lessons from them, and develop a
premature wisdom.
As we age, we can strive to retain the positive youthful qualities that
often fade with the years. For instance, we can regain some of the
natural curiosity we had as children by dropping some of the smugness
and know-it-all attitude that often come over us as we get older. We

[PAGE 611]
keep looking at the world through a fresh framework, questioning our
own values and preconceptions, making our minds more fluid and
creative in the process. As part of this, we can learn a new skill or study
a new field to return us to the joy we once had in learning something
new. We can also meditate on some of the more intense experiences in
our youth, putting ourselves back in those moments through our
imagination, connecting more deeply to who we were. We can feel that
youthful intensity return to some degree in our present experiences.
Part of the reason we become less gregarious with the years is that
we become judgmental and intolerant of people’s quirks, all of which
does not enhance our experience of life. We can alter that as well by
coming to understand human nature more deeply and accepting
people as they are.
Aging has a psychological component and can be a self-fulfilling
prophecy—we tell ourselves we are slowing down and cannot do or
attempt as much as we did in past, and as we act on these thoughts, we
intensify the aging process, which makes us depressed and prone to
slow down even more. We can see icons in the past like Benjamin
Franklin, who went in the opposite direction, continually challenging
his mind and body as he aged, and who by all accounts retained the
most delightfully childlike and jovial disposition well into his seventies
and eighties.
Present generations: Your goal here is to be less a product of the times
and to gain the ability to transform your relationship to your
generation. A key way of doing this is through active associations with
people of different generations. If you are younger, you try to interact
more with those of older generations. Some of them, who seem to have
a spirit you can identify with, you can try to cultivate as mentors and
role models. Others you relate to as you would your peers—not feeling
superior or inferior but paying deep attention to their values, ideas,
and perspectives, helping to widen your own.
If you are older, you reverse this by actively interacting with those
of a younger generation, not as a parent or authority figure but as a
peer. You allow yourself to absorb their spirit, their different way of
thinking, and their enthusiasm. You approach them with the idea that
they have something to teach you.
In interacting on a more authentic level with those of different
generations, you are creating a unique bond—that of people alive at the

[PAGE 612]
same time in history. This will only enhance your grasp of the zeitgeist.
Past generations: When we think about history, we tend to render the
past into a kind of dead and spiritless caricature. Perhaps we feel smug
and superior to past eras, and so we focus on those aspects of history
that indicate backward ideas and values (not realizing that future
generations will do the same to us), seeing what we want to see. Or we
project onto the past the ideas and values of the present, which have
little relation to how those of the past experienced the world. We drain
away their own generational perspective, something we see most
obviously in filmed versions of history, where people talk and act just
like us, only in costumes. Or we simply ignore history, imagining it has
no relevance to our present experience.
We must rid ourselves of such absurd notions and habits. We are
not as superior to those in the past as we like to imagine (see previous
chapters on irrationality, shortsightedness, envy, grandiosity,
conformity, and aggression). There are cultural moments in history
that were superior to our own when it comes to participatory
democracy, or creative thinking, or cultural liveliness. There are
periods in the past in which people had a deeper grasp of human
psychology and a bracing realism that would make us look quite
deluded by comparison. Although human nature remains a constant,
those in the past faced different circumstances with different levels of
technology and had values and beliefs quite different from our own,
and not necessarily inferior. They had the values that reflected their
different circumstances, and we would have shared them as well.
Most important of all, however, we must understand that the past is
by no means dead. We do not emerge in life as blank slates, divorced
from millions of years of evolution. All that we think and experience,
our most intimate thoughts and beliefs, are shaped by the struggles of
past generations. So many ways we relate to the world now came from
changes in thinking long ago.
Whenever we see people who completely sacrifice everything for
some cause, they are reliving a shift in values initiated by the early
Christians of the first century, who revolutionized our way of thinking
by devoting all aspects of life to some ideal. Whenever we fall in love
and idealize the beloved, we are reliving the emotions that the
troubadours of the twelfth century introduced into the Western world,
a sentiment that had never existed before.

[PAGE 613]
Whenever we extol emotions and spontaneity over the intellect and
effort, we are reexperiencing what the Romantic movements of the
eighteenth century first introduced into our psychology. We are not
aware of all this, but we in the present are motley products of all the
accumulated changes in human thinking and psychology. By making
the past into something dead, we are merely denying who we are. We
become rootless and barbaric, disconnected from our nature.
You must radically alter your own relationship to history, bringing
it back to life within you. Begin by taking some era in the past, one that
particularly excites you for whatever reason. Try to re-create the spirit
of those times, to get inside the subjective experience of the actors you
are reading about, using your active imagination. See the world
through their eyes. Make use of the excellent books written in the last
hundred years to help you gain a feel for daily life in particular periods
(for example, Everyday Life in Ancient Rome by Lionel Casson or The
Waning of the Middle Ages by Johan Huizinga). In the literature of the
time you can detect the prevailing spirit. The novels of F. Scott
Fitzgerald will give you a much livelier connection to the Jazz Age than
any scholarly book on the subject. Drop any tendencies to judge or
moralize. People were experiencing their present moment within a
context that made sense to them. You want to understand that from
the inside out.
In this way you will feel differently about yourself. Your concept of
time will expand and you will realize that if the past lives on in you,
what you are doing today, the world you live in, will live on and affect
the future, connecting you to the larger human spirit that moves
through us all. You in this moment are a part of that unbroken chain.
And this can be an intoxicating experience, a strange intimation of
immortality.
The future: We can understand our effect on the future most clearly
in our relationship to our children, or to those young people we
influence in some way as teachers or mentors. This influence will last
years after we are gone. But our work, what we create and contribute to
society, can exert even greater power and can become part of a
conscious strategy to communicate with those of the future and
influence them. Thinking in this way can actually alter what we say or
what we do.

[PAGE 614]
Certainly Leonardo da Vinci followed such a strategy. He
continually tried to envision what the future might be like, to live in it
through his imagination. We can see the evidence of this in his
drawings of possible inventions that might exist in the future, some of
which, like flying machines, he actually attempted to create. He also
thought deeply about the values people might hold in the future that
did not yet exist in the times that he lived through. For instance, he felt
a deep affinity for animals and saw them as possessing souls, a belief
that was virtually unheard of at the time. This impelled him to become
a vegetarian and to go around freeing caged birds in the marketplace.
He saw all nature as one, including humans, and he imagined a future
in which that belief would be shared.
The great feminist, philosopher, and novelist Mary Wollstonecraft
(1759–1797) believed that we humans can actually create the future by
how we imagine it in the present. For her, in her short life, much of
this came in her imagining a future in which the rights of women and,
most important, their reasoning powers were given equal weight to
men. Her thinking in these terms in fact did have a profound influence
on the future.
Perhaps one of the most uncanny examples of this is Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832), a scientist, novelist, and
philosopher. He aspired to a kind of universal knowledge, similar to
Leonardo’s, in which he tried to master all forms of human
intelligence, steep himself in all periods of history, and through this be
able to not only see the future but commune with its inhabitants. He
was able to anticipate a theory of evolution decades before Darwin. He
foresaw many of the great political trends of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, including the eventual unification of Europe after
World War II. He imagined many of the advances of technology and
the effects these would have on our spirit. He was someone who
actively attempted to live outside his time, and his prophetic powers
were legendary among his friends.
Finally, sometimes we may feel like we are born into the wrong
period in history, out of harmony with the times. And yet we are locked
into this moment and must live through it. If such is the case, this
strategy of immortality can bring us some relief. We are aware of the
cycles of history and how the pendulum will swing and the times will
change, perhaps after we are gone. In this way, we can look to the
future and feel some connection to those who are living well beyond

[PAGE 615]
this terrible moment. We can reach out to them, make them part of our
audience. Some day they will read about us or read our words, and the
connection will go in both directions, indicating this supreme human
ability to surmount one’s time and the finality of death itself.
A man’s shortcomings are taken from his epoch; his virtues and greatness
belong to himself.
—Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

[PAGE 616]
18
Meditate on Our Common
Mortality
The Law of Death Denial
Most of us spend our lives avoiding the thought of death. Instead,
the inevitability of death should be continually on our minds.
Understanding the shortness of life fills us with a sense of purpose
and urgency to realize our goals. Training ourselves to confront and
accept this reality makes it easier to manage the inevitable setbacks,
separations, and crises in life. It gives us a sense of proportion, of
what really matters in this brief existence of ours. Most people
continually look for ways to separate themselves from others and feel
superior. Instead, we must see the mortality in everyone, how it
equalizes and connects us all. By becoming deeply aware of our
mortality, we intensify our experience of every aspect of life.
The Bullet in the Side
As a child growing up in Savannah, Georgia, Mary Flannery O’Connor
(1925–1964) felt a strange and powerful connection to her father,
Edward. Some of this naturally stemmed from their striking physical
resemblance—the same large, piercing eyes, the same facial
expressions. But more important to Mary, their whole way of thinking
and feeling seemed completely in sync. She could sense this when her
father participated in the games she invented—he slipped so naturally
into the spirit of it all, and his imagination moved in such a similar
direction to her own. They had ways of communicating without ever
saying a word.

[PAGE 617]
Mary, an only child, did not feel the same way about her mother,
Regina, who came from a socially superior class to her husband and
had aspirations of being a figure in local society. The mother wanted to
mold her rather bookish and reclusive daughter into the quintessential
southern lady, but Mary, stubborn and willful, would not go along.
Mary found her mother and relatives a bit formal and superficial. At
the age of ten, she wrote a series of caricatures of them, which she
called “My Relitives.” In a mischievous spirit, she let her mother and
relatives read the vignettes, and they were, naturally, shocked—not
only by how they were portrayed but also by the sharp wit of this ten-
year-old.
The father, however, found the caricatures delightful. He collected
them into a little book that he showed to visitors. He foresaw a great
future for his daughter as a writer. Mary knew from early on that she
was different from other children, even a bit eccentric, and she basked
in the pride he displayed in her unusual qualities.
She understood her father so well that it frightened her when in the
summer of 1937 she sensed a change in his energy and spirit. At first it
was subtle—rashes on his face, a sudden weariness that came over him
in the afternoon. Then he began to take increasingly long naps and
suffer frequent bouts of flu, his entire body aching. Occasionally Mary
would eavesdrop on her parents as they talked behind closed doors of
his ailments, and what she could glean was that something was
seriously wrong.
The real estate business her father had started some years earlier
was not doing so well, and he had to let it go. A few months later, he
was able to land a government job in Atlanta, which did not pay very
well. To manage their tight budget Mary and her mother moved into a
spacious home owned by relatives in the town of Milledgeville, in the
center of Georgia, not too far from Atlanta.
By 1940 the father was too weak to continue at his job. He moved
back home, and over the next few months Mary watched as her
beloved father grew weaker and thinner by the day, racked by
excruciating pain in his joints, until he finally died on February 1, 1941,
at the age of forty-five. It was months later that Mary learned that his
illness was known as lupus erythematosus—a disease that makes the
body create antibodies that attack and weaken its own healthy tissues.

[PAGE 618]
(Today it is known as systemic lupus erythematosus, and it is the most
severe version of the disease.)
In the aftermath of his death, Mary felt too stunned to speak to
anyone about the loss, but she confided in a private notebook the effect
his death had on her: “The reality of death has come upon us and a
consciousness of the power of God has broken our complacency, like a
bullet in the side. A sense of the dramatic, of the tragic, of the infinite,
has descended upon us, filling us with grief, but even above grief,
wonder.”
She felt as if a part of her had died with her father, so enmeshed had
they been in each other’s lives. But beyond the sudden and violent
wound it inflicted on her, she was made to wonder about what it all
meant in the larger cosmic scheme of things. Deeply devout in her
Catholic faith, she imagined that everything occurred for a reason and
was part of God’s mysterious plan. Something so significant as her
father’s early death could not be meaningless.
In the months to come, a change came over Mary. She became
unusually serious and devoted to her schoolwork, something she had
been rather indifferent to in the past. She began to write longer and
more ambitious stories. She attended a local college for women and
impressed her professors with her writing skill and the depth of her
thinking. She had determined that her father had guessed correctly her
destiny—to be a writer.
Increasingly confident in her creative powers, she decided that her
success depended on getting out of Georgia. Living with her mother in
Milledgeville made her feel claustrophobic. She applied to the
University of Iowa and was accepted with a full scholarship for the
academic year beginning in 1945. Her mother begged her to
reconsider, thinking her only child was too fragile to live on her own,
but Mary had made up her mind. Enrolled in the famous Writers’
Workshop at the university, she decided to simplify her name to
Flannery O’Connor, signaling her new identity.
Working with fierce determination and discipline, Flannery began
to attract attention for her short stories and the characters from the
South she depicted and seemed to know so well, bringing out the dark
and grotesque qualities just below the surface of southern gentility.
Agents and publishers came calling, and the most prestigious
magazines accepted her stories.

[PAGE 619]
After Iowa, Flannery moved to the East Coast, settling in a country
house in Connecticut owned by her friends Sally and Robert Fitzgerald,
who rented out a room to her. There, without distractions, she began
to work feverishly on her first novel. The future seemed so full of
promise, and it was all going according to the plan she had laid out for
herself after the death of her father.
At Christmas of 1949 she returned to Milledgeville for a visit, and
once there she fell quite ill, the doctors diagnosing her with a floating
kidney. It would require surgery and some recovery time at home. All
she wanted was to get back to Connecticut, to be with her friends, and
to finish her novel, which was becoming increasingly ambitious.
Finally, by March, she was able to return, but over the course of the
next few months she experienced strange bouts of pain in her arms.
She visited doctors in New York, who diagnosed her with rheumatoid
arthritis. That December she was to return to Georgia once again for
Christmas, and on the train ride home she fell desperately ill. When
she got off the train and was met by her uncle, she could barely walk.
She felt as if she had suddenly turned elderly and feeble.
Racked with pain in her joints and suffering high fevers, she was
admitted immediately to a hospital. She was told it was a severe case of
rheumatoid arthritis, and that it would take months to stabilize her;
she would have to remain in Milledgeville for an indefinite period. She
had little faith in doctors and was not so sure of their diagnosis, but
she was far too weak to argue. The fevers made her feel as if she were
dying.
To treat her, the doctors gave her massive doses of cortisone, the
new miracle drug, which greatly alleviated the pain and the
inflammation in her joints. It also gave her bursts of intense energy
that troubled her mind and made it race with all kinds of strange
thoughts. As a side effect, it also made her hair fall out and bloated her
face. And as part of her therapy, she had to have frequent blood
transfusions. Her life had suddenly taken a dark turn.
It seemed to her a rather strange coincidence that when the fevers
were at their highest, she had the sensation that she was growing blind
and paralyzed. Only months before, when she was not yet ill, she had
decided to make the main character in her novel blind himself. Had
she foreseen her own fate, or had the disease already been there,
making her think such thoughts?

[PAGE 620]
Feeling death at her heels and writing at a fast pace while in the
hospital, she finished the novel, which she now called Wise Blood,
inspired by all of the transfusions she had undergone. The novel
concerned a young man, Hazel Motes, determined to spread the gospel
of atheism to a new scientific age. He thinks he has “wise blood,” with
no need for any kind of spiritual guidance. The novel chronicles his
descent into murder and madness and was published in 1952.
After months of hospitalization and having sufficiently recovered at
home, Flannery returned to Connecticut for a visit with the Fitzgeralds,
hoping that in the near future she could perhaps resume her old life at
their country home. One day, as she and Sally were taking a drive in
the country, Flannery mentioned her rheumatoid arthritis, and Sally
decided to finally tell her the truth that her overprotective mother, in
league with the doctors, had kept from her. “Flannery, you don’t have
arthritis, you have lupus.” Flannery began to tremble. After a few
moments of silence, she replied, “Well, that’s not good news. But I
can’t thank you enough for telling me. . . . I thought I had lupus, and I
thought I was going crazy. I’d a lot rather be sick than crazy.”
Despite her calm reaction, the news stunned her. This was like a
second bullet in her side, the original sensation returning with double
the impact. Now she knew for sure that she had inherited the disease
from her father. Suddenly she had to confront the reality that perhaps
she did not have long to live, considering how quickly her father had
gone downhill. It was now clear to her that there would be no plans or
hopes for living anywhere else but Milledgeville. She cut short the trip
to Connecticut and returned home, feeling depressed and confused.
Her mother was now the manager of her family’s farm, called
Andalusia, just outside Milledgeville. Flannery would have to spend
the rest of her life on this farm with her mother, who would take care
of her. The doctors seemed to think she could live a normal length of
life thanks to this new miracle drug, but Flannery did not share their
confidence, experiencing firsthand the many adverse side effects and
wondering how long her body could endure them.
She loved her mother, but they were very different. The mother was
the chatty type, obsessed with status and appearances. In her first
weeks back, Flannery felt a sense of panic. She had always been willful,
like her father. She liked living on her own terms, and her mother
could be quite intense and meddlesome. But beyond that, Flannery

[PAGE 621]
associated her creative powers with living her own life outside Georgia,
encountering the wide world, among peers with whom she could talk
about serious matters. She felt her mind expanding with those larger
horizons.
Andalusia would feel like a prison, and she worried that her mind
would tighten up in these circumstances. But as she contemplated
death staring her in the face, she thought deeply about the course of
her life. What clearly mattered to her more than friends or where she
lived or even her health itself was her writing, expressing all of the
ideas and impressions she had accumulated in her short life. She had
so many more stories to write, and another novel or two. Perhaps, in
some strange way, this forced return home was a blessing in disguise,
part of some other plan for her.
In her room at Andalusia, far from the world, she would have no
possible distractions. She would make it clear to her mother that those
two or more hours of writing in the morning were sacred to her and
she would not tolerate any interruptions. Now she could focus all her
energy on her work, get even deeper into her characters, and bring
them to life. Back in the heart of Georgia, listening closely to visitors
and farmhands, she would be able to hear the voices of her characters,
their speech patterns, reverberating in her head. She would feel even
more deeply connected to the land, to the South, which obsessed her.
As she moved about in these first months back home, she began to
feel the presence of her father—in photographs, in objects that he
cherished, in notebooks of his that she discovered. His presence
haunted her. He had wanted to become a writer; she knew that.
Perhaps he had wanted her to succeed where he had failed. Now the
fatal disease they shared tied them together even more tightly; she
would feel the same form of pain that afflicted his body. But she would
write and write, insensitive to the pain, somehow realizing the
potential that her father had seen in her as a child.
Thinking in this way, she realized she had no time to waste. How
many more years would she live and have the energy and clarity to
write? Being so focused on her work would also help rid her of any
anxiety about the illness. When she was writing, she could completely
forget herself and inhabit her characters. It was a religious-like
experience of losing the ego. As she wrote to a friend with the news of
her illness, “I can with one eye squinted take it all as a blessing.”

[PAGE 622]
There were other blessings to count as well: Knowing early on about
her disease, she would have time to get used to the idea of dying young,
and it would lessen the blow; she would relish every minute, every
experience, and make the most of her limited encounters with
outsiders. She could not expect much from life, so everything she got
would mean something. No need to complain or feel self-pity—
everyone had to die at some point. She would find it easier now to not
take so seriously the petty concerns that seemed to roil others so much.
She could even look at herself and laugh at her own pretensions as a
writer, and mock how ridiculous she looked with her bald head,
stumbling around with a cane.
As she returned to writing her stories with a new sense of
commitment, Flannery felt another change from within: an increasing
awareness of and disgust with the course of life and culture in America
in the 1950s. She sensed that people were becoming more and more
superficial, obsessed with material things and plagued by boredom,
like children. They had become unmoored, soulless, disconnected from
the past and from religion, flailing around without any higher sense of
purpose. And at the core of these problems was their inability to face
their own mortality and the seriousness of it.
She expressed some of this in a story inspired by her own illness,
called “The Enduring Chill.” The main character is a young man
returning home to Georgia, deathly ill. As he gets off the train, his
mother, there to meet him, “had given a little cry; she looked aghast.
He was pleased that she should see death in his face at once. His
mother, at the age of sixty, was going to be introduced to reality and he
supposed that if the experience didn’t kill her, it would assist her in the
process of growing up.”
As she saw it, people were losing their humanity and capable of all
kinds of cruelties. They did not seem to care very deeply about one
another and felt rather superior to any kind of outsider. If they could
only see what she had seen—how our time is so short, how everyone
must suffer and die—it would alter their way of life; it would make
them grow up; it would melt all their coldness. What her readers
needed was their own “bullet in the side” to shake them out of their
complacency. She would accomplish this by portraying in as raw a
manner as possible the selfishness and brutality lurking below the
surface in her characters, who seemed so outwardly pleasant and
banal.

[PAGE 623]
The one problem Flannery had to confront with her new life was the
crushing loneliness of it all. She required the company of people to
soothe her, and she depended on the cast of characters she met to
supply her endless material for her work. As her fame grew with the
publication of Wise Blood and her collections of stories, she could
count on the occasional visit to the farm from other writers and fans of
her work, and she lived for such moments, putting every ounce of her
energy into observing her visitors and plumbing their depths.
To fill the gaps between these social encounters, she began a
lengthy correspondence with a growing number of friends and fans,
writing back to almost anyone who wrote to her. Many of them were
quite troubled. There was the young man in the Midwest who felt
suicidal and on the verge of madness. There was the brilliant young
woman from Georgia, Betty Hester, who felt ashamed for being a
lesbian and confided in Flannery, the two of them now regularly
corresponding. Flannery never judged any of them, feeling herself to
be rather odd and outside the mainstream. To this growing cast of
characters and misfits she offered advice and compassion, always
entreating them to devote their energies to something outside
themselves.
The letters were the perfect medium for Flannery, for it allowed her
to keep some physical distance from people; she feared too much
intimacy, as it would mean getting attached to those she would soon
have to say good-bye to. In this way she slowly built the perfect social
world for her purposes.
One spring day in 1953, she received a visit from a tall, handsome
twenty-six-year-old man from Denmark named Erik Langkjaier. He
was a traveling textbook salesman for a major publisher, his territory
including most of the South. He had met a professor at a local college
who had offered to introduce him to the great literary figure of
Georgia, Flannery O’Connor. From the moment he entered her house,
Flannery felt they had some kind of mystical connection. She found
Erik very funny and well read. It was indeed rare to meet someone so
worldly in this part of Georgia. His life as an itinerant salesman
fascinated her; she found it humorous that he carried with him a
“Bible,” what those in the business called the loose-leaf binder of
promotional materials.

[PAGE 624]
Something about his rootless life struck a chord with her. Like
Flannery, Erik’s father had died when he was young. She opened up to
him about her own father and the lupus she had inherited. She found
Erik attractive and was suddenly self-conscious about her appearance,
constantly making jokes about herself. She gave him a copy of Wise
Blood, inscribing it, “For Erik, who has wise blood too.”
He began to arrange his travels so that he could pass often through
Milledgeville and continue their lively discussions. Flannery looked
forward to every visit and felt pangs of emptiness when he left. In May
of 1954, on one of his visits he told her he was taking a six-month leave
from his job to return to Denmark, and he suggested they take a good-
bye car ride through the county, their favorite activity. It was dusk, and
in the middle of nowhere he parked the car on the side of the road and
leaned over to kiss her, which she gladly accepted. It was short, but for
her quite memorable.
She wrote to him regularly and, clearly missing him, kept discreetly
referencing their car rides and how much they meant to her. In
January 1955, she began a story that seemingly poured out of her in a
few days. (Normally she was a careful writer who put stories through
several drafts.) She called it “Good Country People.” One of the
characters is a cynical young woman with a wooden leg. She is
romanced by a traveling salesman of Bibles. She suddenly lets down
her guard and allows him to seduce her, playing her own game with
him. As they are about to make love in a hayloft, he begs her to remove
her wooden leg, as a sign of her trust. This seems far too intimate and a
violation of all her defenses, but she relents. He then runs away with
the leg, never to return.
In the back of her mind she was aware that Erik was somehow
extending his stay in Europe. The story was her way of coping with
this, caricaturing the two of them as the salesman and the cynical
crippled daughter who had let down her guard. Erik had taken her
wooden leg. By April she felt his absence rather keenly and wrote to
him, “I feel like if you were here we could talk about a million things
without stopping.” But the day after she mailed this she received a
letter from him announcing his engagement to a Danish woman, and
he told her of their plans to return to the States, where he would take
up his old job.

[PAGE 625]
She had intuited such an event would happen, but the news was a
shock nonetheless. She replied with utmost politeness, congratulating
him, and they wrote to each other for several more years, but she could
not get over this loss so easily. She had tried to protect herself from any
deep feelings of parting and separation because they were too
unbearable for her. They were like small reminders of the death that
would take her away at any moment, while others would go on living
and loving. And now those very feelings of separation came pouring in.
Now she knew what it was like to experience unrequited love, but
for her it was different—she knew that this was the last such chance for
her and that her life was to be led essentially alone, and it made it all
doubly poignant. She had trained herself to look death square in the
eye, so why should she recoil from facing this latest form of suffering?
She understood what she had to do—transmute this painful experience
into more stories and into her second novel, to use it as means to
enrich her knowledge of people and their vulnerabilities.
In the next few years the drugs began to take a toll, as the cortisone
softened her hip and jawbone and made her arms often too weak to
type. She soon needed crutches to get around. Sunlight had become
her nemesis, as it could reactivate the lupus rashes, and so to take
walks she had to cover every inch of her body, even in the stifling heat
of the summer. The doctors tried to remove her from the cortisone to
give her body some relief, and this lowered her energy and made the
writing that much harder.
Under all the duress of the past few years, she had managed to
publish two novels and several collections of short stories; she was
considered one of the great American writers of her time, although still
so young. But suddenly she began to feel worn down and inarticulate.
She wrote to a friend in the spring of 1962, “I’ve been writing for
sixteen years and I have the sense of having exhausted my original
potentiality and being now in need of the kind of grace that deepens
perception.”
One day shortly before Christmas of 1963, she suddenly fainted and
was taken to the hospital. The doctors diagnosed her with anemia and
began a series of blood transfusions to revive her. She was too weak
now to even sit at her typewriter. Then a few months later they
discovered a benign tumor that they needed to remove. Their only fear
was that the trauma of the surgery would somehow reactivate the

[PAGE 626]
lupus and the powerful episodes of fevers that she had experienced ten
years before.
In letters to friends, she made light of it all. Strangely enough, now
that she was at her weakest, she found the inspiration to write more
stories and prepare a new collection of them for fall publication. In the
hospital she studied her nurses closely and found material for some
new characters. When the doctors prohibited her from working, she
concocted stories in her head and memorized them. She hid notebooks
under her pillow. She had to keep writing.
The surgery was a success, but by mid-March it was clear that her
lupus had come roaring back. She compared it to a wolf (lupus is Latin
for “wolf”) raging inside her now, tearing things up. Her hospital stay
was extended, and yet despite it all, she managed here and there to get
in her daily two hours, hiding her work from the nurses and doctors.
She was in a hurry to scratch out these last stories before it was all
over.
Finally, on June 21, she was allowed to return home, and in the
back of her mind she sensed the end was coming, the memory of her
father’s last days so vivid within her. Pain or no pain, she had to work,
to finish the stories and revisions she had started. If she could manage
only an hour a day, so be it. She had to squeeze out every last bit of
consciousness that remained to her and make use of it. She had
realized her destiny as a writer and had led a life of incomparable
richness. She had nothing now to complain about or regret, except the
unfinished stories.
On July 31, while watching the summer rain by her window, she
suddenly lost consciousness and was rushed to the hospital. She died
in the early hours of August 3, at the age of thirty-nine. In accordance
with her last wishes, Flannery was buried next to her father.
• • •
Interpretation: In the years after the onset of lupus, Flannery
O’Connor noticed a peculiar phenomenon: In her interactions with
friends, visitors, and correspondents, she often found herself playing
the role of the adviser, giving people guidance on how to live, where to
put their energies, how to remain calm amid difficulties and have a
sense of purpose. All the while, she was the one who was dying and
dealing with severe physical restrictions.

[PAGE 627]
She sensed that increasing numbers of people in this world had lost
their way. They could not wholeheartedly commit themselves to their
work or to relationships. They were always dabbling in this or that,
searching for new pleasures and distractions but feeling rather empty
inside. They tended to fall apart in the face of adversity or loneliness,
and they turned to her as someone solid who would be able to tell them
the truth about themselves and give them some direction.
As she saw it, the difference between her and these other people was
simple: She had spent year after year looking death squarely in the eye
without flinching. She did not indulge in vague hopes for the future,
put her trust in medicine, or drown her sorrows in alcohol or
addiction. She accepted the early death sentence imposed on her, using
it for her own ends.
For Flannery, her proximity to death was a call to stir herself to
action, to feel a sense of urgency, to deepen her religious faith and
spark her sense of wonder at all mysteries and uncertainties of life. She
used the closeness of death to teach her what really matters and to help
her steer clear of the petty squabbles and concerns that plagued others.
She used it to anchor herself in the present, to make her appreciate
every moment and every encounter.
Knowing that that her illness had a purpose to it, there was no need
to feel self-pity. And by confronting and dealing with it straight on, she
could toughen herself up, manage the pain that racked her body, and
keep writing. By the time she had received yet another bullet, the
separation with Erik, she could regain her balance after several
months, without turning bitter or more reclusive.
What this meant was that she was thoroughly at home with the
ultimate reality represented by death. In contrast, so many other
people, including those she knew, suffered from a reality deficit,
avoiding the thought of their mortality and the other unpleasant
aspects of life.
Focusing so deeply on her mortality had one other important
advantage—it deepened her empathy and sense of connection to
people. She had a peculiar relationship to death in general: It did not
represent a fate reserved for her alone but rather was intimately tied to
her father. Their sufferings and deaths were intertwined. She saw her
own nearness to death as a call to take this further, to see that all of us
are connected through our common mortality and made equal by it. It

[PAGE 628]
is the fate we all share and should draw us closer for that reason. It
should shake us out of any sense of feeling superior or separated.
Flannery’s increased empathy and feeling of unity with others, as
evidenced by her strong desire to communicate with all types of
people, caused her to eventually let go of one of her greatest
limitations: the racist sentiments toward African Americans she had
internalized from her mother and many others in the South. She saw
this clearly in herself and struggled against it, particularly in her work.
By the early 1960s she came to embrace the civil rights movement led
by Martin Luther King Jr. And in her later stories she began to express
a vision of all the races in America converging one day as equals,
moving past this dark stain on our country’s past.
For over thirteen years, Flannery O’Connor stared down the barrel
of the gun pointed at her, refusing to look away. Certainly her religious
faith helped her maintain her spirit, but as Flannery herself knew, so
many people who are religious are just as full of illusions and evasions
when it comes to their own mortality, and just as capable of
complacency and pettiness as anyone else. It was her particular choice
to use her fatal disease as the means for living the most intense and
fulfilling life possible.
Understand: We tend to read stories like Flannery O’Connor’s
with some distance. We can’t help but feel some relief that we find
ourselves in a much more comfortable position. But we make a grave
mistake in doing so. Her fate is our fate—we are all in the process of
dying, all facing the same uncertainties. In fact, by having her
mortality so present and palpable, she had an advantage over us—she
was compelled to confront death and make use of her awareness of it.
We, on the other hand, are able to dance around the thought, to
envision endless vistas of time ahead of us and dabble our way through
life. And then, when reality hits us, when we perhaps receive our own
bullet in the side in the form of an unexpected crisis in our career, or a
painful breakup in a relationship, or the death of someone close, or
even our own life-threatening illness—we are not usually prepared to
handle it.
Our avoidance of the thought of death has established our pattern
for handling other unpleasant realities and adversity. We easily
become hysterical and lose our balance, blaming others for our fate,
feeling angry and sorry for ourselves, or we opt for distractions and

[PAGE 629]
quick ways to dull the pain. This becomes a habit we cannot shake, and
we tend to feel the generalized anxiety and emptiness that come from
all this avoidance.
Before this becomes a lifelong pattern, we must shake ourselves out
of this dreamlike state in a real and lasting way. We must come to look
at our own mortality without flinching, and without fooling ourselves
with some fleeting, abstract meditation on death. We must focus hard
on the uncertainty that death represents—it could come tomorrow, as
could other adversity or separation. We must stop postponing our
awareness. We need to stop feeling superior and special, seeing that
death is a fate shared by us all and something that should bind us in a
deeply empathetic way. We are all a part of the brotherhood and
sisterhood of death.
In doing so, we set a much different course for our lives. Making
death a familiar presence, we understand how short life is and what
really should matter to us. We feel a sense of urgency and deeper
commitment to our work and relationships. When we face a crisis,
separation, or illness, we do not feel so terrified and overwhelmed. We
don’t feel the need to go into avoidance mode. We can accept that life
involves pain and suffering, and we use such moments to strengthen
ourselves and to learn. And as with Flannery, the awareness of our
mortality cleanses us of silly illusions and intensifies every aspect of
our experience.
When I look back at the past and think of all the time I squandered in error
and idleness, lacking the knowledge needed to live, when I think of how
often I sinned against my heart and my soul, then my heart bleeds. Life is a
gift, life is happiness, every minute could have been an eternity of
happiness! If youth only knew! Now my life will change; now I will be
reborn. Dear brother, I swear that I shall not lose hope. I will keep my soul
pure and my heart open. I will be reborn for the better.
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky
Keys to Human Nature
If we could step back and somehow examine the train of our daily
thoughts, we would realize how they tend to circle around the same
anxieties, fantasies, and resentments, like a continuous loop. Even
when we take a walk or have a conversation with someone, we
generally remain connected to this interior monologue, only half
listening and paying attention to what we see or hear.

[PAGE 630]
Upon occasion, however, certain events can trigger a different
quality of thinking and feeling. Let us say we go on a trip to a foreign
land we have never visited before, outside our usual comfort zone.
Suddenly our senses snap to life and everything we see and hear seems
a little more vibrant. To avoid problems or dangerous situations in this
unfamiliar place, we have to pay attention.
Similarly, if we are about to leave on a trip and must say good-bye
to people we love, whom we may not see for a while, we might
suddenly view them in a different light. Normally we take such people
for granted, but now we actually look at the particular expressions on
their faces and listen to what they have to say. The sense of a looming
separation makes us more emotional and attentive.
A more intense version of this will occur if a loved one—a parent or
a partner or a sibling—dies. This person played a large role in our lives;
we have internalized them, and we have somehow lost a part of
ourselves. As we grapple with this, the shadow of our own mortality
falls over us for an instant. We are made aware of the permanence of
this loss and feel regret that we did not appreciate them more. We may
even feel some anger that life simply goes on for other people, that they
are oblivious to the reality of death that has suddenly struck us.
For several days or perhaps weeks after this loss, we tend to
experience life differently. Our emotions are rawer and more sensitive.
Particular stimuli will bring back associations with the person who has
died. This intensity of emotion will fade, but each time we are
reminded of the person we have lost, a small portion of that intensity
will return.
If we consider death as the crossing of a threshold that terrifies us
in general, the experiences enumerated above are intimations of our
own death in smaller doses. Separating from people we know, traveling
in a strange land, clearly entering some new phase of life, all involve
changes that cause us to look back at the past as if a part of us has died.
In such moments, and during the more intense forms of grief from
actual deaths, we notice a heightening of the senses and a deepening of
our emotions. Thoughts of a different order come to us. We are more
attentive. We can say that our experience of life is qualitatively
different and charged, as if we temporarily became someone else. Of
course, this alteration in our thinking, feeling, and senses will be

[PAGE 631]
strongest if we ourselves survive a brush with death. Nothing seems
the same after such an experience.
Let us call this the paradoxical death effect—these moments and
encounters have the paradoxical result of making us feel more awake
and alive. We can explain the paradoxical effect in the following way.
For us humans, death is a source not only of fear but also of
awkwardness. We are the only animal truly conscious of our
impending mortality. In general, we owe our power as a species to our
ability to think and reflect. But in this particular case, our thinking
brings us nothing but misery. All we can see is the physical pain
involved in dying, the separation from loved ones, and the uncertainty
as to when such a moment might arrive. We do what we can to avoid
the thought, to distract ourselves from the reality, but the awareness of
death lies in the back of our minds and can never be completely
shaken.
Feeling the unconscious impulse to somehow soften the blow of our
awareness, our earliest ancestors created a world of spirits, gods, and
some concept of the afterlife. The belief in the afterlife helped mitigate
the fear of death and even give it some appealing aspects. It could not
eliminate the anxiety of separating from loved ones or lessen the
physical pain involved, but it offered a profound psychological
compensation for the anxieties we seemingly cannot shake. This effect
was fortified by all of the elaborate and pleasing rituals that
surrounded the passage to death.
In the world today, our growing reasoning powers and knowledge of
science have only made our awkwardness worse. Many of us can no
longer believe in the concept of the afterlife with any conviction, but we
are left with no compensations, with only the stark reality confronting
us. We might try to put a brave face on this, to pretend we can accept
this reality as adults, but we cannot erase our elemental fears so easily.
In the course of a few hundred years of this change in our awareness,
we cannot suddenly transform one of the deepest parts of our nature,
our fear of death. And so what we do instead of creating belief systems
such as an afterlife is to rely on denial, repressing the awareness of
death as much as possible. We do so in several ways.
In the past, death was a daily and visceral presence in cities and
towns, something hard to escape. By a certain age, most people had
seen firsthand the deaths of others. Today, in many parts of the world,

[PAGE 632]
we have made death largely invisible, something that occurs only in
hospitals. (We have done something similar to the animals that we
eat.) We can pass through most of life without ever physically
witnessing what happens. This gives a rather unreal aspect to what is
so profoundly a part of life. This unreality is enhanced in the
entertainment we consume, in which death is made to seem rather
cartoonish, with dozens of people dying violent deaths without any
attendant emotion except excitement at the imagery on the screen.
This reveals how deep the need is to repress the awareness and
desensitize ourselves to the fear.
Furthermore, we have recently come to venerate youth, to create a
virtual cult around it. Objects that have aged, films from the past
unconsciously remind us of the shortness of life and the fate that
awaits us. We find ways to avoid them, to surround ourselves with
what is new, fresh, and trending. Some people have even come to
entertain the idea that through technology we can somehow overcome
death itself, the ultimate in human denial. In general, technology gives
us the feeling that we have such godlike powers that we can prolong
life and ignore the reality for quite a long time. In this sense, we are no
stronger than our most primitive ancestors. We have simply found new
ways to delude ourselves.
As a corollary to all this, we find hardly anyone willing to discuss
the subject as a personal reality we all face, and how we might manage
it in a healthier manner. The subject is simply taboo. And by a law of
human nature, when we go so far in our denial, the paradoxical effect
takes hold of us in the negative direction, making our life more
constrained and deathlike.
We became aware of our mortality quite early on in childhood, and
this filled us with an anxiety that we cannot remember but that was
very real and visceral. Such anxiety cannot be wished away or denied.
It sits in us as adults in a powerfully latent form. When we choose to
repress the thought of death, our anxiety is only made stronger by our
not confronting the source of it. The slightest incident or uncertainty
about the future will tend to stir up this anxiety and even make it
chronic. To fight this, we will tend to narrow down the scope of our
thoughts and activities; if we don’t leave our comfort zones in what we
think and do, then we can make life rather predictable and feel less
vulnerable to anxiety. Certain addictions to foods or stimulants or
forms of entertainment will have a similar dulling effect.

[PAGE 633]
If we take this far enough, we become increasingly self-absorbed
and less dependent on people, who often stir up our anxieties with
their unpredictable behavior.
We can describe the contrast between life and death in the following
manner: Death is absolute stillness, without movement or change
except decay. In death we are separated from others and completely
alone. Life on the other hand is movement, connection to other living
things, and diversity of life forms. By denying and repressing the
thought of death, we feed our anxieties and become more deathlike
from within—separated from other people, our thinking habitual and
repetitive, with little overall movement and change. On the other hand,
the familiarity and closeness with death, the ability to confront the
thought of it has the paradoxical effect of making us feel more alive, as
the story of Flannery O’Connor well illustrates.
By connecting to the reality of death, we connect more profoundly
to the reality and fullness of life. By separating death from life and
repressing our awareness of it, we do the opposite.
What we require in the modern world is a way to create for
ourselves the positive paradoxical effect. The following is an attempt to
help us accomplish this, by forging a practical philosophy for
transforming the consciousness of our mortality into something
productive and life enhancing.
A Philosophy of Life Through Death
The problem for us humans is that we are aware of our mortality, but
we are afraid to take this awareness further. It is like we are at the
shore of a vast ocean and stop ourselves from exploring it, even turning
our back to it. The purpose of our consciousness is to always take it as
far as we can. That is the source of our power as a species, what we are
called to do. The philosophy we are adopting depends on our ability to
go in the opposite direction we normally feel toward death—to look at
it more closely and deeply, to leave the shore and explore a different
way of approaching life and death, taking this as far as we can.
The following are five key strategies, with appropriate exercises, to
help us achieve this. It is best to put all five into practice, so that this
philosophy can seep into our daily consciousness and alter our
experience from within.

[PAGE 634]
Make the awareness visceral. Out of fear, we convert death into an
abstraction, a thought we can entertain now and then or repress. But
life is not a thought; it is a flesh-and-blood reality, something we feel
from within. There is no such thing as life without death. Our mortality
is just as much a flesh-and-blood reality as life. From the moment we
are born, it is a presence within our bodies, as our cells die and we age.
We need to experience it this way. We should not see this as something
morbid or terrifying. Moving past this block of ours in which death is
an abstraction has an immensely liberating effect, connecting us more
physically to the world around us and heightening our senses.
In December of 1849, the twenty-seven-year-old writer Fyodor
Dostoyevsky, imprisoned for participating in an alleged conspiracy
against the Russian czar, found himself and his fellow prisoners
suddenly transported to a square in St. Petersburg, and told that they
were about to be executed for their crimes. This death sentence was
totally unexpected. Dostoyevsky had only a few minutes to prepare
himself before he faced the firing squad. In those few minutes,
emotions he had never felt before came rushing in. He noticed the rays
of light hitting the dome of a cathedral and saw that all life was as
fleeting as those rays. Everything seemed more vibrant to him. He
noticed the expressions on his fellow prisoners’ faces, and how he
could see the terror behind their brave façades. It was as if their
thoughts and feelings had become transparent.
At the last moment, a representative from the czar rode into the
square, announcing that their sentences had been commuted to several
years’ hard labor in Siberia. Utterly overwhelmed by his psychological
brush with death, Dostoyevsky felt reborn. And the experience
remained embedded in him for the rest of his life, inspiring new depths
of empathy and intensifying his observational powers. This has been
the experience of others who have been exposed to death in a deep and
personal way.
The reason for this effect can be explained as follows: Normally we
go through life in a very distracted, dreamlike state, with our gaze
turned inward. Much of our mental activity revolves around fantasies
and resentments that are completely internal and have little
relationship to reality. The proximity of death suddenly snaps us to
attention as our whole body responds to the threat. We feel the rush of
adrenaline, the blood pumping extra hard to the brain and through the
nervous system. This focuses the mind to a much higher level and we

[PAGE 635]
notice new details, see people’s faces in a new light, and sense the
impermanence in everything around us, deepening our emotional
responses. This effect can linger for years, even decades.
We cannot reproduce that experience without risking our lives, but
we can gain some of the effect through smaller doses. We must begin
by meditating on our death and seeking to convert it into something
more real and physical. For Japanese samurai warriors, the center of
our most sensitive nerves and our connection to life was in the gut, the
viscera; it was also the center of our connection to death, and they
meditated on this sensation as deeply as possible, to create physical
death awareness. But beyond the gut, we can also feel something
similar in our bones when we are weary. We can often sense its
physicality in those moments before we fall asleep—for a few seconds
we feel ourselves passing from one form of consciousness to another,
and that slip has a deathlike sensation. There is nothing to be afraid of
in this; in fact, in moving in this direction, we make major
advancements in diminishing our chronic anxiety.
We can use our imagination in this as well, by envisioning the day
our death arrives, where we might be, how it might come. We must
make this as vivid as possible. It could be tomorrow. We can also try to
look at the world as if we were seeing things for the last time—the
people around us, the everyday sights and sounds, the hum of the
traffic, the sound of the birds, the view outside our window. Let us
imagine these things still going on without us, then suddenly feel
ourselves brought back to life—those same details will now appear in a
new light, not taken for granted or half perceived. Let the
impermanence of all life forms sink in. The stability and solidity of the
things we see are mere illusions.
We must not be afraid of the pangs of sadness that ensue from this
perception. The tightness of our emotions, usually so wound up around
our own needs and concerns, is now opening up to the world and to the
poignancy of life itself, and we should welcome this. As the fourteenth-
century Japanese writer Kenko noted, “If man were never to fade away
like the dews of Adashino, never to vanish like the smoke over
Toribeyama, but lingered on forever in the world, how things would
lose their power to move us! The most precious thing in life is its
uncertainty.”

[PAGE 636]
Awaken to the shortness of life. When we unconsciously disconnect
ourselves from the awareness of death, we forge a particular
relationship to time—one that is rather loose and distended. We come
to imagine that we always have more time than is the reality. Our
minds drift to the future, where all our hopes and wishes will be
fulfilled. If we have a plan or a goal, we find it hard to commit to it with
a lot of energy. We’ll get to it tomorrow, we tell ourselves. Perhaps we
are tempted in the present to work on another goal or plan—they all
seem so inviting and different, so how can we commit fully to one or
another? We experience a generalized anxiety, as we sense the need to
get things done, but we are always postponing and scattering our
forces.
Then, if a deadline is forced upon us on a particular project, that
dreamlike relationship to time is shattered and for some mysterious
reason we find the focus to get done in days what would have taken
weeks or months. The change imposed upon us by the deadline has a
physical component: our adrenaline is pumping, filling us with energy
and concentrating the mind, making it more creative. It is invigorating
to feel the total commitment of mind and body to a single purpose,
something we rarely experience in the world today, in our distracted
state.
We must think of our mortality as a kind of continual deadline,
giving a similar effect as described above to all our actions in life. We
must stop fooling ourselves: we could die tomorrow, and even if we live
for another eighty years, it is but a drop in the ocean of the vastness of
time, and it passes always more quickly than we imagine. We have to
awaken to this reality and make it a continual meditation.
This meditation might lead some people to think, “Why bother to
try anything? What’s the point of so much effort, when in the end we
just die? Better to live for the pleasures of the moment.” This is not,
however, a realistic assessment but merely another form of evasion. To
devote ourselves to pleasures and distractions is to avoid the thought
of their costs and to imagine we can fool death by drowning out the
thought. In devoting ourselves to pleasures, we must always look for
new diversions to keep boredom at bay, and it’s exhausting. We must
also see our needs and desires as more important than anything else.
This starts to feel soulless over time, and our ego becomes particularly
prickly if we don’t get our way.

[PAGE 637]
As the years go by, we become increasingly bitter and resentful,
haunted with the sense we have accomplished nothing and wasted our
potential. As William Hazlitt observed, “Our repugnance to death
increases in proportion to our consciousness of having lived in vain.”
Let the awareness of the shortness of life clarify our daily actions.
We have goals to reach, projects to get done, relationships to improve.
This could be our last such project, our last battle on earth, given the
uncertainties of life, and we must commit completely to what we do.
With this continual awareness we can see what really matters, how
petty squabbles and side pursuits are irritating distractions. We want
that sense of fulfillment that comes from getting things done. We want
to lose the ego in that feeling of flow, in which our minds are at one
with what we are working on. When we turn away from our work, the
pleasures and distractions we pursue have all the more meaning and
intensity, knowing their evanescence.
See the mortality in everyone. In 1665 a terrible plague roared through
London, killing close to 100,000 inhabitants. The writer Daniel Defoe
was only five years old at the time, but he witnessed the plague
firsthand and it left a lasting impression on him. Some sixty years
later, he decided to re-create the events in London that year through
the eyes of an older narrator, using his own memories, much research,
and the journal of his uncle, creating the book A Journal of the Plague
Year.
As the plague raged, the narrator of the book notices a peculiar
phenomenon: people tend to feel much greater levels of empathy
toward their fellow Londoners; the normal differences between them,
particularly over religious issues, vanish. “Here we may observe,” he
writes, “. . . that a near View of Death would soon reconcile Men of
good Principles, one to another, and that it is chiefly owing to our easy
Scituation in Life, and our putting these Things far from us, that our
Breaches are fomented, ill blood continued. . . . Another Plague Year
would reconcile all these Differences, a close conversing with Death, or
with Diseases that threaten Death, would scum off the Gall from our
Tempers, remove the Animosities among us, and bring us to see with
differing Eyes.”
There are plenty of examples of what seems to be the opposite—
humans slaughtering thousands of fellow humans, often in war, with
the sight of such mass deaths not stimulating the slightest sense of

[PAGE 638]
empathy. But in these cases, the slaughterers feel separate from those
they are killing, whom they have come to see as less than human and
under their power. With the plague, no one is spared, no matter their
wealth or station in life. Everyone is equally at risk. Feeling personally
vulnerable and seeing the vulnerability of everyone else, people’s
normal sense of difference and privilege is melted away, and an
uncommon generalized empathy emerges. This could be a natural state
of mind, if we could only envision the vulnerability and mortality of
others as not separate from our own.
With our philosophy, we want to manufacture the cleansing effect
that the plague has on our tribal tendencies and usual self-absorption.
We want to begin this on a smaller scale, by looking first at those
around us, in our home and our workplace, seeing and imagining their
deaths and noting how this can suddenly alter our perception of them.
As Schopenhauer wrote, “The deep pain that is felt at the death of
every friendly soul arises from the feeling that there is in every
individual something which is inexpressible, peculiar to him or her
alone, and is, therefore, absolutely and inextricably lost.” We want to
see that uniqueness of the other person in the present, bringing out
those qualities we have taken for granted. We want to experience their
vulnerability to pain and death, not just our own.
We can take this meditation further. Let us look at the pedestrians
in any busy city and realize that in ninety years it is likely that none of
them will be alive, including us. Think of the millions and billions who
have already come and gone, buried and long forgotten, rich and poor
alike. Such thoughts make it hard to maintain our own sense of grand
importance, the feeling that we are special and that the pain we may
suffer is not the same as others’.
The more we can create this visceral connection to people through
our common mortality, the better we are able to handle human nature
in all its varieties with tolerance and grace. This does not mean we lose
our alertness to those who are dangerous and difficult. In fact, seeing
the mortality and vulnerability in even the nastiest individual can help
us cut them down to size and deal with them from a more neutral and
strategic space, not taking their nastiness personally.
In general, we can say that the specter of death is what impels us
toward our fellow humans and makes us avid for love. Death and love
are inextricably interconnected. The ultimate separation and

[PAGE 639]
disintegration represented by death drive us to unite and integrate
ourselves with others. Our unique consciousness of death has created
our particular form of love. And through a deepening of our death
awareness we will only strengthen this impulse, and rid ourselves of
the divisions and lifeless separations that afflict humanity.
Embrace all pain and adversity. Life by its nature involves pain and
suffering. And the ultimate form of this is death itself. In the face of
this reality, we humans have a simple choice: We can try to avoid
painful moments and to muffle their effect by distracting ourselves, by
taking drugs or engaging in addictive behavior. We can also restrict
what we do—if we don’t try too hard in our work, if we lower our
ambitions, we won’t expose ourselves to failure and ridicule. If we
break off relationships early on, we can elude any sharp, painful
moments from the separation.
At the root of this approach is the fear of death itself, which
establishes our elemental relationship to pain and adversity, and
avoidance becomes our pattern. When bad things happen, our natural
reaction is to complain about what life is bringing us, or what others
are not doing for us, and to retreat even further from challenging
situations. The negative paradoxical death effect takes hold.
The other choice available to us is to commit ourselves to what
Friedrich Nietzsche called amor fati (“love of fate”): “My formula for
greatness in a human being is amor fati: that one wants nothing to be
other than it is, not in the future, not in the past, not in all eternity. Not
merely to endure that which happens of necessity . . . but to love it.”
What this means is the following: There is much in life we cannot
control, with death as the ultimate example of this. We will experience
illness and physical pain. We will go through separations with people.
We will face failures from our own mistakes and the nasty malevolence
of our fellow humans. And our task is to accept these moments, and
even embrace them, not for the pain but for the opportunities to learn
and strengthen ourselves. In doing so, we affirm life itself, accepting all
of its possibilities. And at the core of this is our complete acceptance of
death.
We put this into practice by continually seeing events as fateful—
everything happens for a reason, and it is up to us to glean the lesson.
When we fall ill, we see such moments as the perfect opportunity to
retreat from the world and get away from its distractions, to slow

[PAGE 640]
down, to reassess what we are doing, and to appreciate the much more
frequent periods of good health. Being able to accustom ourselves to
some degree of physical pain, without immediately reaching for
something to dull it, is an important life skill.
When people resist our will or turn against us, we try to assess what
we did wrong, to figure out how we can use this to educate ourselves
further in human nature and teach ourselves how to handle those who
are slippery and disagreeable. When we take risks and fail, we welcome
the chance to learn from the experience. When relationships fail, we
try to see what was wrong in the dynamic, what was missing for us,
and what we want from the next relationship. We don’t cocoon
ourselves from further pain by avoiding such experiences.
In all of these cases, we will of course experience physical and
mental pain, and we must not fool ourselves that this philosophy will
instantly turn the negative into a positive. We know that it is a process
and that we must take the blows, but that as time passes our minds will
go to work converting this into a learning experience. With practice, it
becomes easier and quicker to convert.
This love of fate has the power to alter everything we experience
and lighten the burdens we carry. Why complain over this or that,
when in fact we see such events as occurring for a reason and
ultimately enlightening us? Why feel envy for what others have, when
we possess something far greater—the ultimate approach to the harsh
realities of life?
Open the mind to the Sublime. Think of death as a kind of threshold we
all must cross. As such, it represents the ultimate mystery. We cannot
possibly find the words or concepts to express what it is. We confront
something that is truly unknowable. No amount of science or
technology or expertise can solve this riddle or verbalize it. We humans
can fool ourselves that we know just about everything, but at this
threshold we are finally left dumb and groping.
This confrontation with something we cannot know or verbalize is
what we shall call the Sublime, whose Latin root means “up to the
threshold.” The Sublime is anything that exceeds our capacity for
words or concepts by being too large, too vast, too dark and
mysterious. And when we face such things, we feel a touch of fear but
also awe and wonder. We are reminded of our smallness, of what is
much vaster and more powerful than our puny will. Feeling the

[PAGE 641]
Sublime is the perfect antidote to our complacency and to the petty
concerns of daily life that can consume us and leave us feeling rather
empty.
The model for feeling the Sublime comes in our meditation on
mortality, but we can train our minds to experience it through other
thoughts and actions. For instance, when we look up at the night sky,
we can let our minds try to fathom the infinity of space and the
overwhelming smallness of our planet, lost in all the darkness. We can
encounter the Sublime by thinking about the origin of life on earth,
how many billions of years ago this occurred, perhaps at some
particular moment, and how unlikely it was, considering the thousands
of factors that had to converge for the experiment of life to begin on
this planet. Such vast amounts of time and the actual origin of life
exceed our capacity to conceptualize them, and we are left with a
sensation of the Sublime.
We can take this further: Several million years ago, the human
experiment began as we branched off from our primate ancestors. But
because of our weak physical nature and small numbers, we faced the
continual threat of extinction. If that more-than-likely event had
happened—as it had occurred for so many species, including other
varieties of humans—the world would have taken a much different
turn. In fact, the meeting of our own parents and our birth hung on a
series of chance encounters that were equally unlikely. This causes us
to view our present existence as an individual, something we take for
granted, as a most improbable occurrence, considering all of the
fortuitous elements that had to fall into place.
We can experience the Sublime by contemplating other forms of
life. We have our own belief about what is real based on our nervous
and perceptual systems, but the reality of bats, which perceive through
echolocation, is of a different order. They sense things beyond our
perceptual system. What are the other elements we cannot perceive,
the other realities invisible to us? (The latest discoveries in most
branches of science will have this eye-opening effect, and reading
articles in any popular scientific journal will generally yield a few
sublime thoughts.)
We can also expose ourselves to places on the planet where all our
normal compass points are scrambled—a vastly different culture or
certain landscapes where the human element seems particularly puny,

[PAGE 642]
such as the open sea, a vast expanse of snow, a particularly enormous
mountain. Physically confronted with what dwarfs us, we are forced to
reverse our normal perception, in which we are the center and measure
of everything.
In the face of the Sublime, we feel a shiver, a foretaste of death
itself, something too large for our minds to encompass. And for a
moment it shakes us out of our smugness and releases us from the
deathlike grip of habit and banality.
—
In the end, think of this philosophy in the following terms: Since the
beginning of human consciousness, our awareness of death has
terrified us. This terror has shaped our beliefs, our religions, our
institutions, and so much of our behavior in ways we cannot see or
understand. We humans have become the slaves to our fears and our
evasions.
When we turn this around, becoming more aware of our mortality,
we experience a taste of true freedom. We no longer feel the need to
restrict what we think and do, in order to make life predictable. We can
be more daring without feeling afraid of the consequences. We can cut
loose from all the illusions and addictions that we employ to numb our
anxiety. We can commit fully to our work, to our relationships, to all
our actions. And once we experience some of this freedom, we will
want to explore further and expand our possibilities as far as time will
allow us.
Let us rid death of its strangeness, come to know it, get used to it. Let us
have nothing on our minds as often as death. At every moment let us
picture it in our imagination in all its aspects. . . . It is uncertain where
death awaits us; let us await it everywhere. Premeditation of death is
premeditation of freedom. . . . He who has learned how to die has unlearned
how to be a slave. Knowing how to die frees us from all subjection and
constraint.
—Michel de Montaigne

[PAGE 643]
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I would like to thank Anna Biller for her
assistance on so many aspects of this book—including her deft
editing, the endless insightful ideas she supplied me during our
discussions, and all the love and support during the writing. This book
would not be possible without her many contributions, and I am
eternally grateful.
I would like to thank my agent, Michael Carlisle of Inkwell
Management, master of human nature, for all his invaluable advice
and assistance on the project. Also at Inkwell, my thanks go to Michael
Mungiello, and to Alexis Hurley, for bringing the book to a global
audience.
I have many people to thank at Penguin, most important of all my
editor, Andrea Schulz, for all her much appreciated work on the text,
and our numerous conversations in which she helped sharpen the
concept and share with me her own insights on human nature. I must
also thank the original editor on the project, Carolyn Carlson, as well
as Melanie Tortoroli for her editorial contributions. I would also like to
thank Andrea’s assistant, Emily Neuberger; the designer of the cover
Colin Webber; in the marketing department, Kate Stark and Mary
Stone; and Carolyn Coleburn and Shannon Twomey for their work on
the publicity front.
I must also thank Andrew Franklin, publisher of Profile Books in
England, who has been there for all six of my books, and whose literary
and publishing acumen I can always count on.
As always, I must thank my former apprentice and now bestselling
author and master strategist Ryan Holiday for all of his research
suggestions, marketing help, and overall wisdom.
I cannot forget to thank my cat, Brutus, who has now overseen the
production of my last five books and who has helped me understand
the human animal from a very different perspective.

[PAGE 644]
I would like to thank my dear sister, Leslie, for all her love, support,
and many ideas she has inspired over the years. And of course I must
thank my very patient mother, Laurette, for everything she has done
for me, not least of all instilling in me a love of books and history.
And finally, I would like to thank all those innumerable people
throughout my life who’ve shown me the worst and the best in human
nature, and who’ve supplied me endless material for this book.

[PAGE 645]
Selected Bibliography
Adler, Alfred. Understanding Human Nature: The Psychology of Personality. Translated by
Colin Brett. Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 2011.
Allport, Gordon W. The Nature of Prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1979.
Ammaniti, Massimo, and Vittorio Gallese. The Birth of Intersubjectivity: Psychodynamics,
Neurobiology, and the Self. New York: W.W. Norton, 2014.
Arendt, Hannah. Between Past and Future. New York: Penguin Books, 1993.
Argyle, Michael. Bodily Communication. New York: Routledge, 2001.
Balen, Malcolm. A Very English Deceit: The South Sea Bubble and the World’s First Great
Financial Scandal. London: Fourth Estate, 2003.
Barlett, Donald L., and James B. Steele. Howard Hughes: His Life and Madness. New York:
W.W. Norton, 2004.
Baron-Cohen, Simon. Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Bion, W. R. Experiences in Groups: And Other Papers. New York: Routledge, 1989.
Bly, Robert. A Little Book on the Human Shadow. New York: HarperOne, 1988.
Bradford, Sarah. America’s Queen: The Life of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis. New York:
Penguin Books, 2001.
Caro, Robert A. Master of the Senate: The Years of Lyndon Johnson. New York: Vintage
Books, 2003.
Chancellor, Edward. Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation. New York:
Plume, 2000.
Chernow, Ron. Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr. New York: Vintage Books, 1998.
Cozolino, Louis. The Neuroscience of Human Relationships: Attachment and the Developing
Social Brain. New York: W.W. Norton, 2006.
Crawshay-Williams, Rupert. The Comforts of Unreason: A Study of the Motives Behind
Irrational Thought. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1970.
Damasio, Antonio. The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of
Consciousness. Orlando, FL: Harcourt, 1999.
de Waal, Frans. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex Among Apes. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 2007.
Diamond, Jared. The Third Chimpanzee: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal.
New York: Harper Perennial, 2006.
Dostoevsky, Fyodor. The Idiot. Translated by Constance Garnett. New York: Barnes & Noble
Classics, 2004.

[PAGE 646]
Douglas, Claire. The Woman in the Mirror: Analytical Psychology and the Feminine. Lincoln,
NE: Backinprint.com, 2000.
Durkheim, Émile. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. Translated by Karen E. Fields.
New York: The Free Press, 1995.
Ekman, Paul. Emotions Revealed: Recognizing Faces and Feelings to Improve
Communication and Emotional Life. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2007.
Eliot, George. Middlemarch. Surrey, UK: Oneworld Classics, 2010.
Fairbairn, W. R. D. Psychoanalytic Studies of the Personality. New York: Routledge: 1994.
Fromm, Erich. The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness. New York: Henry Holt, 1992.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. A Short History of Financial Euphoria. New York: Penguin Books,
1994.
Galbraith, Stuart, IV. The Emperor and the Wolf: The Lives and Films of Akira Kurosawa and
Toshiro Mifune. New York: Faber and Faber, 2002.
Gao Yuan. Born Red: A Chronicle of the Cultural Revolution. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1987.
Garelick, Rhonda K. Mademoiselle: Coco Chanel and the Pulse of History. New York: Random
House, 2014.
Garrow, David J. Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference. New York: William Morrow, 2004.
Goffman, Erving. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Doubleday, 1959.
Gooch, Brad. Flannery: A Life of Flannery O’Connor. New York: Back Bay Books, 2010.
Gordon, Charlotte. Romantic Outlaws: The Extraordinary Lives of Mary Wollstonecraft &
Mary Shelley. New York: Random House, 2015.
Havens, Ronald A. The Wisdom of Milton H. Erickson: The Complete Volume. Carmarthen,
UK: Crown House, 2003.
Humphrey, Nicholas. The Inner Eye: Social Intelligence in Evolution. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2008.
Huxley, Aldous. The Devils of Loudun. New York: Harper Perennial, 2009.
Joule, Robert-Vincent, and Jean-Léon Beauvois. Petit traité de manipulation à l’usage des
honnêtes gens. Grenoble, France: Presses universitaires de Grenoble, 2014.
Jung, C. G. The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious. Translated by R. F. C. Hull.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton/Bollingen Paperbacks, 1990.
Jung, C. G. Psychological Types. Translated by H. G. Baynes. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton/Bollingen Paperbacks, 1990.
Kagan, Donald. Pericles of Athens and the Birth of Democracy. New York: Free Press, 1991.
Keeley, Lawrence H. War Before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1996.
Kindleberger, Charles P. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000.
Klein, Melanie. Envy and Gratitude: And Other Works 1946–1963. New York: Free Press,
1975.
Kohut, Heinz. The Analysis of the Self: A Systematic Approach to the Psychoanalytic
Treatment of Narcissistic Personality Disorders. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

[PAGE 647]
2009.
Konner, Melvin. The Tangled Wing: Biological Constraints on the Human Spirit. New York:
Henry Holt, 2002.
Laing, R. D., H. Phillipson, and A. R. Lee. Interpersonal Perception: A Theory and Method of
Research. New York: Perennial Library, 1972.
Lansing, Alfred. Endurance: Shackleton’s Incredible Voyage. Philadelphia: Basic Books, 2007.
Lawday, David. The Giant of the French Revolution: Danton, a Life. New York: Grove, 2009.
LeDoux, Joseph. The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life.
New York: Simon & Schuster Paperbacks, 1996.
Lev, Elizabeth. The Tigress of Forlì: Renaissance Italy’s Most Courageous and Notorious
Countess, Caterina Riario Sforza de’ Medici. Boston: Mariner Books, 2011.
Lever, Evelyne. Louis XVI. Paris: Pluriel, 2014.
Lowenstein, Roger. Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York: Random
House Trade Paperbacks, 2008.
Maslow, Abraham H. The Farther Reaches of Human Nature. New York: Penguin Compass,
1993.
McLean, Bethany, and Joe Nocera. All the Devils Are Here: The Hidden History of the
Financial Crisis. New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2011.
Milgram, Stanley. Obedience to Authority: The Experiment That Challenged Human Nature.
New York: Harper Perennial, 2009.
Montefiore, Simon Sebag. Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar. New York: Vintage Books, 2003.
Moore, Robert L. Facing the Dragon: Confronting Personal and Spiritual Grandiosity.
Wilmette, IL: Chiron, 2003.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Human, All Too Human: A Book for Free Spirits. Translated by R. J.
Hollingdale. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Oates, Stephen B. With Malice Toward None: A Biography of Abraham Lincoln. New York:
Harper Perennial, 2011.
Ortega y Gasset, José. Man and People. Translated by Willard R. Trask. New York: W.W.
Norton, 1963.
Pavese, Cesare. This Business of Living: Diaries 1935–1950. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction,
2009.
Pfeiffer, John E. The Emergence of Society: A Prehistory of the Establishment. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1977.
Piaget, Jean, and Bärbel Inhelder. The Psychology of the Child. Translated by Helen Weaver.
Paris: Basic Books, 2000.
Ramachandran, Vilayanur S. A Brief Tour of Human Consciousness. New York: PI Press,
2004.
Rosen, Sidney. My Voice Will Go with You: The Teaching Tales of Milton H. Erickson. New
York: W.W. Norton, 1982.
Russell, Bertrand. The Conquest of Happiness. New York: Horace Liveright, 1996.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. The Wisdom of Life and Counsels and Maxims. Translated by T. Bailey
Saunders. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995.
Seymour, Miranda. Mary Shelley. New York: Grove, 2000.

[PAGE 648]
Shirer, William L. Love and Hatred: The Stormy Marriage of Leo and Sonya Tolstoy. New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1994.
Smith, David Livingstone. The Most Dangerous Animal: Human Nature and the Origins of
War. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2007.
Stewart, James B. Disney War. New York: Simon Schuster Paperbacks, 2006.
Strauss, William, and Neil Howe. Generations: The History of American’s Future, 1584 to
2069. New York: William Morrow, 1991.
Tavris, Carol, and Elliot Aronson. Mistakes Were Made (but Not by Me): Why We Justify
Foolish Beliefs, Bad Decisions, and Hurtful Acts. New York: Harcourt, 2007.
Thomas, Evan. Being Nixon: A Man Divided. New York: Random House, 2015.
Thouless, R. H., and C. R. Thouless. Straight & Crooked Thinking. Hachette, UK: Hodder
Education, 2011.
Tomkins, Silvan, Shame and Its Sisters: A Silvan Tomkins Reader. Edited by Eve Kosofsky
Sedgwick and Adam Frank. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1995.
Troyat, Henri. Chekhov. Translated by Michael Henry Heim. New York: Fawcett Columbine,
1986.
Tuchman, Barbara. The March of Folly. New York: Ballantine Books, 1984.
Tuckett, David. Minding the Markets: An Emotional Finance View of Financial Instability.
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
Watzlawick, Paul, Janet Beavin Bavelas, and Don D. Jackson. Pragmatics of Human
Communication: A Study of Interactional Patterns, Pathologies and Paradoxes. New
York: W.W. Norton, 2011.
Weir, Alison. The Life of Elizabeth I. New York: Ballantine Books, 2008.
Wilson, Colin. A Criminal History of Mankind. New York: Carroll & Graf, 1990.
Wilson, Edward O. On Human Nature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Winnicott, D. W. Human Nature. London: Free Association Books, 1992.

[PAGE 649]
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Index
The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided will
take you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that location
to find the corresponding reference on your e-reader.
ABC, 291–92, 296–99, 301
ABC News, 232
Abel and Cain, 273
Absalom, 46
absence, 131
balancing presence with, 99–100, 467–68
knowing how and when to withdraw, 143–44
silence, 468
acting, 80–81, 82
groups and, 413–14
method, 99
see also role-playing
action, masculine and feminine styles of, 351–53
adaptability, and authority, 469
addiction, 44, 111, 577, 583, 586
aggressive behavior as, 497
admiration, 290
adversity, 225–26, 583–84
Aeschylus, 290
aging, 556, 557–58
aggression, 6, 406, 473–517
as addiction, 497
aggressor’s trap, 497
ambition and, 513–14
anger and, 491, 498, 516–17
chronic, 495–97, 500, 512, 513
controlled, 498, 499, 511–17

[PAGE 650]
denial of, 501–3
energy of, 486, 492–93, 512–13
examining your own, 498–99
fearlessness and, 515–16
fighting dirty, 500–501
generations and, 541–42
genetic component to, 495
insecurity and, 491, 493–96
internal saboteur and, 498, 512
narrative of, 487–88, 490, 498–500
obsessions and, 500
persistence and, 514–15
positive and negative aspects of, 493
primitive, 489, 495–96
root of word, 493
self-opinion and, 491–92
sophisticated, 489, 496, 500
source of, 493–503
spectrum of, 493, 498
taking action against, 490–91
technology and, 502
tolerance of, 499
aggression, passive, 424, 473, 493, 498, 503–11, 513
Blame-Shifter Strategy, 508–10
Dependency Strategy, 506–7
Insinuating-Doubt Strategy, 508
Passive-Aggressive Charmer, 250–51
Passive-Tyrant Strategy, 510–11
Subtle-Superiority Strategy, 504–5
Sympathy Strategy, 505–6
aimlessness, see purpose, sense of
Aislabie, John, 153
Alcibiades, 35, 46
alcohol, Prohibition and, 163
Alexander VI, Pope, 327–28
Alexander the Great, 227
Alone (Byrd), 409
Ambassadors, The (James), 84, 190

[PAGE 651]
ambition, 513–14
ambivalent-enmeshed attachment pattern, 112, 113
amor fati, 583–84
Andrews, Samuel, 475, 476
anger, 3, 4, 25, 467
aggression and, 491, 498, 516–17
envy and, 25, 272, 273
toxic, 516
using in work, 517
anima and animus, 335–39, 341, 355
animus voices, 354
Anne, Queen of England, 152
Antony, Mark, 83–84, 100
anxiety, 240, 372–73, 375–76, 414, 556, 586
aggression and, 496
groups and social force and, 407, 408
anxious attitude, 218–19
appearance, and conformity, 412
appearance bias, 30
armies, 376
art
anger in, 517
authority in, 461–62
Aśoka, 37, 457
atheists, 252
Athena, 15, 19–21, 27, 38, 41
Athens, 13–21, 26, 27, 199–200, 374
Attacher, 281–82
attachment patterns between mothers and children, 112–13, 118, 128
attention
need for, 42–43
pursuit of, 388–89
seeking status through, 6
sudden, 34
attention span, 161, 166
attitude, 202–30
authority and, 464–65
cool, 227

[PAGE 652]
Jung’s definition of, 213
soul and, 229–30
attitude, negative (constricted), 202, 215–24
anxious, 218–19
avoidant, 219–21
depressive, 221–22
hostile, 217–18
resentful, 222–24
attitude, positive (expansive), 202, 215–16, 224–30
adversity and, 225–26
energy and health and, 228
other people and, 228–29
viewing the world with, 225
viewing yourself with, 226–27
attribution bias, 50
audience, adapting to, 99
Augustus (Octavius), 84, 100–101, 116, 162, 223
aura, 467–68
authenticity, 97–98, 254
authority and, 463–64
humility and, 100
authority, 438–72
adaptability and, 469
in the arts, 461–62
attitude and, 464–65
aura and, 467–68
authenticity and, 463–64
disdain for, 461–62
false forms of, 462
group, 462
inner, 469–72
overpromising and, 468–69
parents as figures of, 461, 462
strategies for establishing, 460, 463–69
taking and giving and, 468–69
tone and, 466–67
vision and, 465–66
see also leaders, leadership

[PAGE 653]
autonomous/free attachment pattern, 112
autonomy, in self-opinion, 185, 186, 191–92
avoidant attitude, 219–21
baby boomers, 542, 543, 545, 546, 548–50
Babylonians, 541
backbiting, 276
Baker, Josephine, 255, 260, 549, 552
Balsan, Etienne, 132–34, 137
banality, 253
baseline expression and mood, 83–84
Bassui, 201
bats, 585
Battlefield News, 397, 401
battles, tactical hell and, 165
Bay of Pigs, 284
Beaumarchais, Pierre-Augustin Caron de, 139, 193–94
Behrs, Sonya, 63–66
Benson, Byron, 482–84, 488–89
Bergman, Ingmar, 259
Bergman, Ingrid, 379, 384–85
Bevel, James, 364
biases, 28–32
appearance, 30
attribution, 50
blame, 31
confirmation, 29
conviction, 29–30, 95
group, 30–31, 35
in interpreting nonverbal cues, 85
negative, 141
superiority, 31–32
Big Talker, 124–25
Birmingham, Ala., 363–65, 368
Black Death, 484
blame bias, 31
Blame-Shifter Strategy, 508–10
Blunt, Charles, 156
Blunt, John, 150–58

[PAGE 654]
Bly, Robert, 255–56
Boccaccio, Giovanni, 321
body language, 83, 84
see also nonverbal communication
Boleyn, Anne, 439, 440, 450
boredom, 372, 375
Borgia, Cesare, 328–29, 331
Born Red (Gao), 402, 403
Botticelli, Sandro, 323
Bouvier, Jack, 341–42
Bowie, David, 332
Bowlby, John, 112
brain, 3, 24, 25, 390, 538
character and, 112, 113, 127
imagination and, 141
induction and, 140–41
malleability in early years, 112
mirror neurons in, 51
observational skills and, 83
parts of, 24
short-term thinking and, 160–61
social interaction and, 49
sudden success and, 34
Brummell, Beau, 253
bubbles, 23, 164, 415
Bubble Act, 155, 157
South Sea Company, 150–58, 415
Buffett, Warren, 37, 120, 162, 351, 457
Bülow, Hans von, 221–22
Byrd, Richard E., 409
Byrd, Robert, 179
Byron, George Gordon, Lord, 262–63, 265, 266, 269
Caesar, Julius, 35, 84, 162, 163, 164, 227
Cain and Abel, 273
Capel, Arthur “Boy,” 134, 382
career, 371–72, 374, 494
“Case of Identity, A” (Conan Doyle), 101
causes, 306, 373, 386–87, 413

[PAGE 655]
armies and, 376
Cecil, William, 440–44
Chaerephon, 199–200
chameleon effect, 52
Chanel, Gabrielle “Coco,” 131–38, 145, 146, 260, 285, 382, 469, 554
Chanel No. 5, 135
Change (Watzlawick, Weakland, and Fisch), 197
Chaplin, Charlie, 255
character, 7–8, 111–12
awareness and covering up of flaws in, 113, 114
brain and, 112, 113, 127
childhood attachment pattern and, 112–13
conflicting traits, 114
etymology of word, 111
examining and shaping your own, 114, 128, 129–30
genetic component of, 112
habits and, 102, 113, 114, 127
indicators of, 115–21
positive traits, 113
power and, 117
strength of, 102–30
superior, 127–30
toxic types of, see toxic types
Charles II, Archduke of Austria, 442
Charles IX, King, 442
Charterhouse of Parma, The (Stendhal), 88
Chekhov, Alexander, 204–7
Chekhov, Anton, 11, 37, 39–40, 144, 202–11, 214, 227, 228, 378, 419–20
Sakhalin Island and, 208–9
Chekhov, Mikhail, 205–7
Chekhov, Nikolai, 204, 206
Chekhov, Pavel Yegorovich, 202–7, 209, 210, 214, 228
Chekhov, Yegor Mikhailovich, 205–6
Chesterfield, Philip Stanhope, Lord, 195
Chicago Bulls, 433
childhood, 539–40, 547
and ambivalence of emotions, 455
attachment patterns in, 112–13, 118, 128

[PAGE 656]
character traits of, 254, 256, 258
envy and, 277–78
fearlessness in, 515
gender roles in, 332, 335–37
grandiosity and, 305–6, 318
mortality awareness in, 577
parental power in, 424
primal inclinations in, 374, 378–79
remembering, 140, 455
sense of self in, 348
spirit of, 553
trigger points from, 32–33
see also parents
China, 352, 374
China, communist, 306, 391–405
Cultural Revolution in, 37, 315, 392–405, 411
Chopin, Frédéric, 338
Christian religion, 186, 559
chummy leader, 462
Churchill, Winston, 241, 255, 318
Cicero, 46, 520, 552
Cimino, Michael, 313–14
Civil Rights Act, 365
civil rights movement, 360–66, 573
Civil War, 166–67, 257, 475, 477, 481
Clark, James, 475
Clark, Maurice B., 473–77, 488, 489
Clinton, Bill, 35, 99, 285
clothing styles, 537–38, 554
Coltrane, John, 463
Columbo, 97
cobra effects, 164
cobras, in India, 163–64
Colson, Charles, 233, 235, 428
comparisons, 6, 11, 287–88, 289
downward, 288–89
emulation, 289–90
see also envy

[PAGE 657]
competitive instincts, appeal to, 192
complacency, 141, 147, 585
compulsive behavior, 102–30
see also character
Conan Doyle, Arthur, 101
con artists, 96
confidence, 92, 94, 113–14, 354, 422, 437, 458
confirmation bias, 29
conformity, 30, 201, 391–437
see also groups
Connally, Tom, 172–74, 180
Connor, Bull, 363, 364–65
contradictory behavior, 241–42, 244, 248–54
contrasts, 140–41
conversation, 50
deep listening in, 188–89
conviction bias, 29–30, 95
Corneille, Pierre, 195
court and courtiers, 418–19, 424–32
Court Jester, 429
covetousness, see desire
crashes, financial, 23
of 1929, 166
of 2008, 22–23, 158, 388, 548
Crawford, Joan, 128–29, 226
Crime and Punishment (Dostoyevsky), 302
criticism, 516
aggression and, 496, 497, 499–500
in push and pull, 276–77
sense of purpose and, 381–82
cults, 37, 386–87, 423
cultural ecosystem, 374
Cultural Revolution, 37, 315, 392–405, 411
culture, 461
change in, 535–36, 537–38
contribution to, 377, 470
youth culture and, 541, 543
culture, group, 416–17, 422

[PAGE 658]
Curie, Marie, 378, 514
cyberwar, 502
cynicism, 389
d’Allegre, Yves, 329
Danton, Gabrielle, 522, 530, 534
Danton, Georges-Jacques, 35, 508, 520–23, 526–31, 533–36, 542, 552
Darius, 465
dark side, see Shadow
Darnley, Henry Stuart, Lord, 443
Darwin, Charles, 37, 162, 560
David, King, 35, 273
deadlines, 381, 580
Dean, John, 233, 236, 237
death, 170, 385, 493, 555–61, 562–86
and awakening to the shortness of life, 580–81
and belief in afterlife, 576
childhood awareness of, 577
denial of, 577
and embracing pain and adversity, 583–84
in entertainment, 576
envisioning our own, 579–80
invisibility of, in modern world, 576
life contrasted with, 577
love and, 583
of loved one, 575
paradoxical death effect, 575–78
philosophy of life through, 578–86
seeing the mortality in everyone, 581–83
Sublime and, 319, 584–86
as taboo subject, 577
visceral awareness of, 578–80
deception
cues to, 86, 95–97
scale of, 97
decision making, 411–12, 421, 423, 461
hypercertainty and, 415–16
Decourcelle, Pierre, 132
Defense Department, 104, 105, 417

[PAGE 659]
defensiveness, 172–201
Defoe, Daniel, 581–82
de Gaulle, Charles, 233, 238
Deliverer, 463
democracy, 461, 462
Deng Zeng, 396, 397
denial, 244–45
Dependency Strategy, 506–7
depression, 240, 373, 376, 498, 556
depressive attitude, 221–22
Depression, Great, 545, 548
desire, 131–49
contagious, 414
grass-is-always-greener syndrome, 139–42, 147
illicit, 146
induction and, 140–41, 146–47
and knowing how and when to withdraw, 143–44
possession and, 147
rivalries of, 144–46
strategies for stimulating, 143–47
supreme, 147–49
d’Este, Isabella, 313
details, being lost in, 168–69
Devilish Romantic, 341–42
Dick Tracy, 295
Diderot, Denis, 532
Dietrich, Marlene, 192, 260, 549
Diller, Barry, 291–92, 299–300
Ding Yi, 392–94, 396
dislike/like cues, 86–91
disorganized attachment pattern, 112
dismissing attachment pattern, 112–13
Disney, Roy, 293, 295, 298, 300
Disney, Walt, 292, 294, 295
Disney Company, 282–83, 291–301, 312
Euro Disney, 294, 298, 300, 301, 317
Go, 298
display rules, 85–86

[PAGE 660]
Disraeli, Benjamin, 193, 332
Dods, Miss, 267
dominance/submission cues, 86, 91–95, 100
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 21, 96, 259, 302, 390, 574, 578–79
Drake, Francis, 445, 452
Drama Magnet, 123–24
dramatic effects, 99–100
dreams, 256–57, 258
DreamWorks, 301
Dreyfus, Alfred, 85
Dudley, Robert, 442, 443
East-Is-Red Corps, 397–402, 405
East-Is-Red Middle School, 401–2
Easy Moralizer, 126–27
ecosystems, 374
Edison, Thomas, 381, 514
Education of Cyrus, The (Xenophon), 319
Edward VI, King, 440
ego, 370, 372, 384, 469–70
Egypt, exodus from, 139
Ehrlichman, John, 233, 237
Einstein, Albert, 255, 258, 351, 384, 514
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 146, 178, 232
Eisner, Michael, 282–83, 291–301, 304, 306, 307, 312, 511
Ekman, Paul, 90
Eliot, George, 346
Elizabeth I, Queen, 162, 168, 352, 438–54, 457, 459, 466–69
Cecil and, 440–44
Essex and, 446–49, 452–53
Mary, Queen of Scots and, 443–45, 451
Philip II and, 168, 442, 444–46, 451–52
Ellington, Duke, 332
Elusive Woman of Perfection, 342–43
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 171
emotions, 7, 9, 11, 24–25, 455–56
ambivalence of, 455–56
balancing thinking and, 40
evolution of, 3, 4, 24, 25

[PAGE 661]
examining to their roots, 38
in groups, 407, 410, 414–15, 435–36
inflaming factors and, 32–37
influence and, 197
mastering your Emotional Self, 13–41
reaction time and, 38–39
Shadow and, 244
social media and, 6, 26
strong, 455
see also irrationality
empathy, 9–10, 42–71, 113, 129, 187, 411, 437
analytic, 52–53, 54
attitude in, 49–50
in boys, 332, 335, 354–55
grandiosity and, 309
in leaders, 458–59
skill in, 53–54
visceral, 50–52, 54, 58, 458
see also narcissism, narcissists
emulation, transmuting envy into, 289–90
Endurance, 67, 69
“Enduring Chill, The” (O’Connor), 568
energy, purposeful, 382
Enlightenment, 532, 533
enmeshed-ambivalent attachment pattern, 112, 113
envier types, 277–83, 424
Attacher, 281–82
Insecure Master, 282–83
Leveler, 278–79
Self-entitled Slacker, 279–80
Status Fiend, 280–81
envy, 6, 25, 140, 246, 261–90, 508
admiration and, 290
anger and, 25, 272, 273
backbiting and, 276
dealing with an attack by an envier, 286
disguising of, 272, 274
downward comparisons and, 288–89

[PAGE 662]
microexpressions and, 88, 89, 274–75
Mitfreude and, 289, 290
moving beyond, 287–90
moving closer to what you envy, 288
origins in infancy and childhood, 277–78
passive and active, 273–74, 287
praise and, 275–77, 284
prevalence of, 286
“push and pull” and, 276–77
schadenfreude and, 275, 289
signs of, 88, 89, 274–77
social media and, 286
transmuting into emulation, 289–90
triggers of, 283–87
Erickson, Milton, 72–79, 86, 91, 197–98, 505
Essex, Robert Devereux, Earl of, 446–49, 452–53, 552
Euro Disney, 294, 298, 300, 301, 317
evil eye, 274
evolution, 319, 560
of emotions, 3, 4, 24, 25
of human nature, 3–4
of nonverbal communication, 81
excellence, 471
expectations about people, 190
explanations, seeking, 22
Extreme Entrepreneur, 253–54
extroverts, 112, 118–19, 128
narcissism and, 44
facial expressions, 83
microexpressions, 83, 87, 89, 274–75
smiles, 90
Fairbairn, Ronald, 512
Fallen Woman, 344–46
Fanatic, 251–52
fantasy, 138, 142–44, 147, 148
farsighted perspective, 160–62, 169–71
fashion, 537–38, 554
fate, 13, 111, 130

[PAGE 663]
love of, 583–84
Favorite, 430–31
Fawcett, J. W., 479
fear, 11, 25
aggression and, 491
groups and, 414–15
fearlessness, 515–16
feedback, 53
Feo, Giacomo, 326–27, 331
Feo, Tommaso, 325–26
Filelfo, Francesco, 321
financial bubbles, 23, 164, 415
Bubble Act, 155, 157
South Sea Company, 150–58, 415
financial crashes, 23
of 1929, 166
of 2008, 22–23, 158, 388, 548
first impressions, 99, 274, 466
Fisch, Richard, 197
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 559
Fitzgerald, Robert, 564
Fitzgerald, Sally, 564, 565–66
flattery, 97, 196, 418–19, 430
Flaubert, Gustave, 502
flexible mind, 199–201, 258
flow, 316, 383–84
focus, 471
force multiplier, 376
Ford, John, 433
Foreign Affair, A, 192
Founder, 463
Frames of Mind (Gardner), 379
France, 518–39
Estates General in, 522–24, 533
Flanders Regiment in, 525, 527
National Assembly in, 524–26
Revolution in, 35, 61, 250, 306, 376, 508, 526–31, 534–35
Terror in, 530, 531, 535

[PAGE 664]
Frankenstein (Shelley), 261, 262, 266
Franklin, Benjamin, 557–58
Frazer, James, 457
free/autonomous attachment pattern, 112
Freemasons, 533, 553
Freud, Sigmund, 244, 318, 343, 491
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 141
gains, sudden, 34
Gandhi, Indira, 312
Gandhi, Mahatma, 358, 360
Gao Yuan (Gao Jianhua), 391–402, 404, 405
Gardner, Howard, 379
Gatekeeper, 427
Gay, John, 153
gender projections, 339, 340–48
Devilish Romantic, 341–42
Elusive Woman of Perfection, 342–43
Fallen Woman, 344–46
Lovable Rebel, 344
Superior Man, 346–47
Woman to Worship Him, 347–48
gender roles and masculine and feminine traits, 320–55
action styles and, 351–53
as anima and animus, 335–39, 341, 355
in childhood, 332, 335–37
equality and, 340, 349
generational differences in, 549
hyperfeminine woman, 338–39
hypermasculine man, 338
leadership and, 354–55
self-assessment and learning styles and, 353–54
shifting gender roles, 340
thinking styles and, 350–51
value judgments on, 349–50
General Tire Company, 107
generation, exploiting spirit of, 551–55
adapting and, 554–55
adapting the past to the present, 552–53

[PAGE 665]
childhood and, 553
creating new social configuration, 553–54
pushing against the past, 551–52
subversion, 554
generations, 469, 518–61
aggressive individuals in, 541–42
future, 560–61
gender relationships and, 549
generational awareness, 539
Generation X, 545, 548
heroes and icons of, 549
length of, 538
millennial, 545
1920s, 542, 543, 546, 549, 553, 555, 559
1950s, 542, 546, 548, 549, 555
1960s, 542, 543, 545, 546, 548–50, 554
parenting styles of, 548–59
past, 558–60
patterns in, 544–46
personality or spirit of, 540, 542–43, 547–48
perspective of, 540, 541
present, 558
rebels in, 542
shadow side to, 549
tensions between, 550
variations in, 541–42
younger, judgment of, 541
your own, 546–47, 550, 551–55
youth culture and, 541, 543
zeitgeist and, 518, 543, 547, 550, 551, 554, 558
genetics, 538
aggression and, 495
character and, 112
George I, King, 151–54, 157
gifts and rewards, 192
global warming, 161
Go, 298
goals, 303, 374, 471

[PAGE 666]
group, 408
ladder of, 382–83
long-term, 150, 158, 160, 165, 168–70, 382–83, 471
Godwin, William, 262, 266
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 466, 556, 560–61
Golden Bough, The (Frazer), 457
Goldman Sachs, 285–86
“Good Country People” (O’Connor), 569
goodness, in self-opinion, 185, 186, 194–95
gossip, 276, 287
Graham, Katherine, 235
Grandier, Urbain, 59–62
grandiose leaders, 311–15, 458
“I am destined,” 311
“I have the golden touch,” 314
“I’m invulnerable,” 314–15
“I’m the common man/woman,” 311–12
“I rewrite the rules,” 313–14
“I will deliver you,” 312–13
grandiose victim, 308
grandiosity, 291–319, 436
big talk and, 309
calibrated challenges and, 317–18
childhood roots of, 305–6, 318
concentrating energy of, 316
empathy and, 309
fantastical, 315–17
humility and, 308
letting loose, 318
low-grade, 304
managing your own, 310, 315–18
measuring levels of, 308–9
negative forms of, 308
practical, 315–18
prevalence of, 306–7, 308
realistic attitude and, 310, 316–17
religion and, 306
reverse, 319

[PAGE 667]
Grant, Ulysses S., 167
grass-is-always-greener syndrome, 139–42, 147
Great Depression, 545, 548
Greeley, Horace, 167
groups, 6, 80, 391–437
authority of, 462
battle-tested, 436–37
conformity in, 30, 201, 391–437
court and courtiers in, 418–19, 424–32
Court Jester in, 429
culture of, 416–17, 422
detaching from, 406–7, 423
differences and, 424
dynamics in, 416–21
dysfunctional, 431–33, 437
effects on individuals in, 412–16
elites in, 421
emotions in, 407, 410, 414–15, 435–36
enemies of, 406, 419–20, 422
energy of belonging to, 407–8, 410
factions in, 406, 420–21, 432
Favorite in, 430–31
Gatekeeper in, 427
goals of, 408
group bias, 30–31, 35
group effect, 35–36
hypercertainty in, 415–16
insecurities and, 421–22
intelligence of, 411–12
Intriguer in, 425–26, 427
large-scale, 423
lieutenants in, 434
loyalty to, 407
Mirrorer in, 429–30
need to fit in with, 407, 410, 412–13, 422, 423
observing, 422–23
open communication in, 434–35
performing in, 413–14

[PAGE 668]
Punching Bag in, 430–31
reality and, 422–23, 424, 431–37
rituals in, 410
rules and codes in, 417–18, 422
sacred cows in, 418
sense of purpose in, 433–34
Shadow Enabler in, 427–29
social force in, 408–11, 422
social personality and, 391
Stirrer in, 426–27, 432
success in, 418
suspicious toward outsiders to, 411
talking in front of, 408
tribalism in, 6, 423–24, 463
virtual, 410
guardrails, 494–95, 498, 501
Hadamard, Jacques, 258
Haig, Alexander, 237, 425–26
Hakuin, 198, 381, 514
Haldeman, Bob, 117, 233, 235–37
Haley, Alex, 51
halo effect, 30
Hanks, Tom, 293
Hannibal, 352, 515
hatred, 246
Hazlitt, William, 581
Healer, 464
health, 224
expansive attitude and, 228
Heaven’s Gate, 313
Hegel, G. W. F., 537
helicopters, 107–8
Hell’s Angels, 103–4, 106
helplessness, 494–96, 556
Henry IV, King of France, 522
Henry VIII, King of England, 439–41, 450
Heraclitus, 110
Hercules project, 104, 105

[PAGE 669]
Hesiod, 283
Hess, E. H., 90
Hester, Betty, 568
Hewitt, Isaac, 479–80
Hewitt and Tuttle, 474
Hillary, Edmund, 70
Hiss, Alger, 234
history, 559, 561
Hitchcock, Alfred, 469, 555
Hitler, Adolf, 56
Hoffer, Eric, 407
Hogg, Thomas, 265–68, 270
Hollywood, 313–14, 417, 419
honesty, 138, 142, 187, 188, 419
Horace, 244
horse and rider metaphor, 40
hostile attitude, 217–18
hostility, and love, 494
Howard, Catherine, 440–41
Hudson, Huberht, 68
Hughes, Howard, Jr., 102–10, 115, 122, 127–28
Hughes, Howard, Sr., 102, 103, 108, 109, 110, 127
Hughes Aircraft, 104–5, 107, 110
Hughes Tool Company, 102, 103, 104, 107, 109–10
human nature, 1–6, 492
acceptance of, 39
evolution of, 3–4
laws of, 5–11
humility, 100, 493
grandiose, 308
Humphrey, Hubert, 176–82, 231, 232
Hunt, E. Howard, 236, 237
Hunt, Leigh, 265, 267–68, 270
Hurley, Frank, 68
hypercertainty, 415–16
hyperintention, 388
Hyperperfectionist, 121–22, 129
IBM, 433

[PAGE 670]
Ibn Khaldun, 544
Ibsen, Henrik, 241
Idiot, The (Dostoyevsky), 96
Illustrious Women (Boccaccio), 321
imagination, 141, 142, 144, 147, 149, 373
brain and, 141
imitation, mimicking, and mirroring, 51–52, 410
immortality, strategy of, 561
impression management, 82, 97–101
inclinations, primal, 374, 378–79
induction, 140–41, 146–47
inflaming factors, 32–37
inflaming individuals, 35, 39
influence, 8–9, 172–83, 187–88
deep listening in, 188–89
insecurities in, 195–96
mood in, 189–91
prejudice against idea of, 187
resistance and stubbornness in, 196–98
self-opinion in, 191–95
strategies for, 188–98
In Search of Lost Time (Proust), 345
Insecure Master, 282–83
insecurity(ies), 372, 375, 493
aggression and, 491, 493–96
groups and, 421–22, 423
of others, allaying, 195–96
Insinuating-Doubt Strategy, 508
intellectuals, 536
intelligence
forms of, 379–80
group, 411–12
in self-opinion, 185, 186, 193–94
internal saboteur, 498, 512
internet, 49, 502
see also social media
Intriguer, 425–26, 427
introverts, 112, 118, 119, 128

[PAGE 671]
narcissism and, 44
invidia, 274
invulnerability, in leaders, 314–15
Iraq, 164
Iribe, Paul, 285
irrationality, 13–41
biases and, see biases
defining, 26–27
fundamental, 24
high-grade, 28, 32
historical cycles of, 36–37
low-grade, 27–28
Rigid Rationalist and, 252–53
see also emotions; rationality
isolation, 409–10
Jackson, Michael, 143–44, 253
Jackson, Phil, 433, 436
Jackson, Reggie, 249, 280–81
James, Henry, 84, 190
James, William, 54, 211, 225
James VI, King, 443
Jeanne des Anges (Jeanne de Belcier), 59–62
Jester, 429
Jet Pilot, 106–7
Jews, 85
Nixon and, 235
Wagner and, 246
Jobs, Steve, 258, 259, 298, 378, 380, 384, 388, 457
Johnson, Lady Bird, 175
Johnson, Lyndon Baines, 95, 117–18, 172–82, 184, 190, 366, 417
Connally and, 172–74, 180
Humphrey and, 176–82
Russell and, 174–76, 178–81
Joseph (Old Testament character), 161–62, 273
Journal of the Plague Year, A (Defoe), 581–82
Jung, Carl, 213, 242, 260, 335, 354
on anima and animus, 335, 336
Katzenberg, Jeffrey, 282–83, 293, 295–98, 300–301, 511

[PAGE 672]
Kenko, 580
Kennedy, Jacqueline, 136, 255, 260, 284, 288, 341–42, 552
Kennedy, John F., 146, 179, 231, 235, 284, 332, 342, 417
assassination of, 365
civil rights and, 363–65
New Frontier of, 553
Kennedy, Robert F., 235
Khrushchev, Nikita, 57
King, A. D., 367
King, Coretta Scott, 358, 359, 361, 362
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 356–70, 376, 379, 387, 457, 463, 467, 573
assassination of, 367
King, Martin Luther, Sr., 356–59, 367–68
Kirov, Sergey, 55
Kissinger, Henry, 233, 236, 238–39, 425
Klein, Melanie, 112, 277, 278, 495
Kohut, Heinz, 305
Korean War, 175, 176, 315
Kreutzer Sonata, The (Tolstoy), 64
Kurosawa, Akira, 379, 552–53
La Bruyère, Jean de, 183
Lagerfeld, Karl, 253
Langkjaier, Erik, 569–70, 572
language, in influence, 197–98
Law, John, 150–51, 156, 158
leaders, leadership, 308, 406, 407, 410, 423, 432
ambivalence and fickleness toward, 438, 456–59, 463
authority of, see authority
charismatic, 406, 407
court and courtiers of, 418–19, 424–32
dark side and, 247
disdain for, 461–62
empathy in, 458–59
enemies and, 420
grandiose, see grandiose leaders
masculine and feminine styles of, 354–55
narcissistic, 46, 47
as parental figures, 456

[PAGE 673]
vision of, 458–59, 465–66
learning, 375
masculine and feminine styles of, 353–54
Lee, Robert E., 167
Lenin, Vladimir, 59
Leonardo da Vinci, 37, 375, 471, 556, 560
Leveler, 278–79
Liddy, G. Gordon, 236
lieutenants, 434
life
and awakening to shortness of, 580–81
connection with, 318–19
death contrasted with, 577
phases of, 556–58
philosophy of, through death, 578–86
life choices, 371
life force, 229
like/dislike cues, 86–91
limits, accepting, 310
see also grandiosity
Lincoln, Abraham, 37, 52, 117, 162, 166–68, 233, 241, 253, 255, 257–58, 355, 457, 481
Civil War and, 166–67, 257
Lin Sheng, 395–96
Lion King, The, 295, 296, 300
listening, deep, 188–89
Liszt, Cosima, 221–22
Liszt, Franz, 221
Long-Term Capital Management, 23
long-term goals, 150, 158, 160, 165, 168–70, 382–83, 471
losses, sudden, 34
Louis XIV, King, 89, 519, 523, 525, 532
Louis XV, King, 518, 519, 532
Louis XVI, King, 193–94, 518–29, 531–35
coronation carriage of, 521, 531–32, 536
Lovable Rebel, 344
love, and death, 583
love, falling in, 184, 333–34, 336–37, 340, 559
changes occurring in, 334–35

[PAGE 674]
hostility and, 494
Lustig, Victor, 96
Lynch, David, 463
MacArthur, Douglas, 176, 314, 315
Machiavellianism, 100, 195, 247
Madoff, Bernie, 96
Magruder, Jeb, 117
Mailer, Norman, 260
maker’s mind-set, 37–38
Malcolm X, 226, 517
Mao Zedong, 306, 315, 392–406, 420
Marcus Aurelius, 37
Marguerite de Valois, 37
Marie Antoinette, 518–19, 521, 522, 525, 532
Marriage of Figaro, The (Beaumarchais), 193–94
Martin, Billy, 249
Marx, Karl, 358, 396
Mary, Queen of Scots, 443–45, 450, 451
Mary I, Queen, 439, 441, 444
masks, 72, 101
see also role-playing
Maslow, Abraham, 227, 383
May, Rollo, 517
McCarthy hearings, 37
McCord, James, 236, 237
McFarland, Ernest, 178
McGovern, George, 236
McNeish, Harry, 69
Mead, Margaret, 37, 351
Meade, George, 167
Medici, Giovanni de’, 327
Merkel, Angela, 92–94, 457
Merrill Lynch, 315
method acting, 99
Michelangelo, 283
microexpressions, 83, 87, 89, 274–75
microtrends, 166
Middlemarch (Eliot), 346

[PAGE 675]
midlife crisis, 348
Mignon, Canon, 59–60
Miramax, 296
Mirrorer, 429–30
mirroring and mimicking, 51–52, 410
Mississippi Company, 150–51, 155
Mitfreude, 289, 290
Miyamoto Musashi, 352
money, pursuit of, 387–88
Montaigne, Michel de, 586
Montgomery, Ala., 359–60, 362, 368, 369
Montgomery bus boycott, 360, 379
Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA), 360–62, 368
mood(s), 455
baseline, 83–84
influence and, 189–91
morality, 115, 126–27, 142
in self-opinion, 185, 186, 194–95
mortality, see death
Moses, 139–40, 457, 463
mystery, 100, 131, 138, 143
NAACP, 359, 360, 362
Napoleon, 306, 376, 432, 435, 466
narcissism, narcissists, 42–71
complete control, 54–59
couples, 63–66
deep, 43–49, 62, 66, 304
examples of types of, 54–71
extroverted, 44
functional, 47–48
healthy, 48, 67–71
introverted, 44
leaders, 46, 47
Self-entitled Slacker and, 279
self-love and, 47
spectrum of, 42–54, 66
theatrical, 59–63
see also empathy

[PAGE 676]
negative bias, 141
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 312
Nero, 46
Nettles, Graig, 280–81
news cycle, 161, 166
Newton, Isaac, 153, 155–58
Nicias, 17–18
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 41, 200, 289, 370, 389, 437, 583
Nixon, E. D., 360
Nixon, Hannah, 233, 237, 239
Nixon, Pat, 234
Nixon, Richard, 117, 231–42, 244–45, 255, 338
childhood of, 238–39
Colson and, 233, 235, 428
Eisenhower and, 232
Haig and, 425–26
Hiss and, 234
tapes of, 233–34, 237–40
Vietnam War and, 234, 235
Watergate and, 236–38, 425
Nobel Peace Prize, 365
noble savage, 501
nonverbal communication, 72–79
body language, 83, 84
cultural differences in, 85–86
deception cues, 86, 95–97
dislike/like cues, 86–91
dominance/submission cues, 86, 91–95, 100
Erickson and, 72–79, 86, 91
evolution of, 81
interpreting, 85–86
mastery of, 98–99
mixed signals in, 84
and observational skill development, 82–86
observing your own, 86
rapport and, 190
validation and, 410
see also facial expressions

[PAGE 677]
nous, 19, 20
O’Brien, Larry, 235, 236
observational skills, 82–86
of Erickson, 75–79
observing yourself, 86
oceanic feeling, 318–19
O’Connor, Flannery, 562–74, 578
Octavius, see Augustus
Odlum, Floyd, 106
oil industry, 475–78, 487
Standard Oil, 478–85, 487–88, 502
Onassis, Aristotle, 288, 342
Onassis, Jacqueline Kennedy, 136, 255, 260, 284, 288, 341–42, 552
O’Neal, Stan, 315
Orsi, Ludovico, 325–26
Ortega y Gasset, José, 472
ostinato rigore, 471
Othello (Shakespeare), 81, 85
Othello’s error, 85
overidealization, 245–46
Ovitz, Michael, 296–98, 301
Pampered Prince/Princess, 125
panderer, 462
Paramount Pictures, 291–93, 295, 299
parents, 424, 467, 504, 540
as authority figures vs. friends, 461, 462
children’s dependence on, 507
domineering, 495, 504
leaders associated with, 456
parenting styles of, 548–59
see also childhood
Parks, Rosa, 360
partner or spouse, choice of, 118
passive-aggressiveness, see aggression, passive
Pasteur, Louis, 258, 351
patience, 168, 494
Pavese, Cesare, 130
Payne, Oliver H., 477–79, 488

[PAGE 678]
peaceful human, myth of, 501
peak experiences, 227, 383–84
Pearl Harbor attack, 163–64
Pennsylvania Railroad, 481, 487
people
expectations about, 190
viewing with expansive attitude, 228–29
Perelle, Charles, 105–6
Pericles, 14–21, 27, 36–38, 41, 457
Perkins, Frances, 429–30
Persia, 465
persistence, 514–15
persona, 101
personality, 101
Personalizer, 123, 129
perspective
farsighted, 160–62, 169–71
see also shortsightedness
persuasion, see influence
Philip II of Spain, King, 168–69, 442, 444–46, 451–52
Picasso, Pablo, 463, 469
Picture of Dorian Gray, The (Wilde), 201
Pixar, 298
Pleaser, 125–26, 129, 219
pleasure, pursuit of, 386, 581
pleasure principle, 28, 29
political correctness, 146
Pope, Alexander, 153
pornography, 141
possession, and desire, 147
potential, realizing, 10–11
power, 101, 128, 494
character and, 117
pragmatism, 310–11
praise
for effort vs. talent, 195–96
envy and, 275–77, 284
presence, 131

[PAGE 679]
balancing absence with, 99–100, 467–68
present circumstances, 150, 157–59, 169–71
Price, Ray, 238
primal inclinations, 374, 378–79
prioritizing, 471
Prohibition, 163
projection
gender, see gender projections
of Shadow, 246
promises, 468–69, 507
Proust, Marcel, 333, 345
psychiatry, 75
psychoanalysis, 538
psychosomatic maladies, 94, 220
Punching Bag, 430–31
purpose, sense of, 356–90
absorbing purposeful energy, 382
creating a ladder of descending goals, 382–83
discovering your calling in life, 378–80
false purposes vs., 385
in groups, 433–34
losing yourself in the work, 383–85
strategies for developing, 378–85
using resistance and negative spurs, 380–82
purposes, false, 377, 385–90
causes and cults, 386–87
cynicism, 389
pursuit of attention, 388–89
pursuit of money and success, 387–88
pursuit of pleasure, 386
real purpose vs., 385
Putin, Vladimir, 93
Quiet Pragmatist, 464
railroads, 478–84
Pennsylvania Railroad, 481, 487
Raphael, 283
rationality, 13, 19–21, 27, 37, 40–41
defining, 26–27

[PAGE 680]
Rigid Rationalist and, 252–53
strategies toward, 37–41
see also irrationality
Raw Youth, A (Dostoyevsky), 21
reactive mode, 150, 158, 162, 170
Reagan, Ronald, 426
realistic attitude, 310–11, 316–17
reality, 96, 212, 389, 585
reality groups, 422–23, 424, 431–37
Red Guards, 397, 404
Red Rebels, 398–402, 405
Reed, Luther, 103
Relentless Rebel, 122–23, 129
religion, 115, 186, 252, 306, 373, 385
grandiosity and, 306
repression, 231–60
see also Shadow
Republic Oil, 484
resentful attitude, 222–24
resistance, 172–201
in developing sense of purpose, 380–82
of others, using, 196–98
rewards and gifts, 192
Riario, Girolamo, 322–24, 326–27
Rice, George, 484–85
Richelieu, Cardinal, 61, 195
rider and horse metaphor, 40
rigidity, influence and, 198
Rigid Rationalist, 252–53
RKO Pictures, 106–7
Robespierre, Maximilien, 250, 508, 530, 531
Robinson, Isabel, 267–68
Rockefeller, John D., 474–89, 497, 499–500, 504
Benson and, 482–84, 488–89
childhood of, 486–87
Clark and, 474–77, 488, 489
Fawcett and, 479
Payne and, 478–79, 488

[PAGE 681]
Rice and, 484–85
Scott and, 481–82, 488–89
Rockefeller, William, 486, 487
role-playing, 72–101
authenticity and, 97–98
impression management, 82, 97–101
negative connotations of term, 97–98
see also nonverbal communication
Romans, 457–58
Romanticism, 534, 559
Ronche, Giacomo del, 325–26
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 120, 219, 260
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 120, 177–79, 219, 433
Perkins and, 429–30
Roosevelt, Sara, 219
Roots (Haley), 51
Rubin, Robert, 285–86
rules, 373
grandiosity and, 313–14
in groups, 417–18, 422
Russell, Richard, 174–81
Sacre coronation carriage, 521, 531–32, 536
Saint, 250
saintliness, 100, 194, 220, 241
Sakhalin Island, 208–9
Saldivar, Yolanda, 281–82
salons, 553
Sand, George, 338
sans-culottes, 527
Sarkozy, Nicolas, 93–94
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 378
Saul, King, 273
Savior, 126
schadenfreude, 275, 289
Schary, Dore, 106
Scipio Africanus, 457
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 1, 79–80, 149, 230, 275, 582
Schorr, Daniel, 235

[PAGE 682]
scientists, 350–51
Scott, Tom, 480–82, 488–89
Selena, 281–82
self
childhood sense of, 348
higher and lower, 10–11, 469–70
social, 348
viewing with expansive attitude, 226–27
self-absorption, 42, 78–79, 82, 142, 182, 463, 577, 582
self-assessment and learning, masculine and feminine styles of, 353–54
self-awareness, 113–14, 247
grandiosity and, 310
groups and, 391
self-confidence, 92, 94, 113–14, 354, 422, 437, 458
Self-entitled Slacker, 279–80
self-esteem, 43–48, 389, 422
aggression and, 496–97
low, 354
self-image, 43, 44, 47, 48, 389
self-knowledge, 38
of limits, 310
and overcoming negative traits, 9
self-love, 42, 47, 48, 50
narcissism and, 47
see also narcissism, narcissists
self-objects, 45
self-opinion, 172–201, 422
aggression and, 491–92
autonomy in, 185, 186, 191–92
goodness in, 185, 186, 194–95
grandiose, see grandiosity
intelligence in, 185, 186, 193–94
low, 187, 196
personalized, 185–86
your own, 201
self-sabotage and self-destructive behavior, 116, 161, 229, 240
see also attitude, negative
Severus, Cassius, 116

[PAGE 683]
Sexualizer, 124–25
Sforza, Caterina, 320–32
Sforza, Galeazzo Maria, 320–22, 324, 327, 328, 330
Shackleton, Ernest Henry, 67–71, 355
Shadow, 4, 6, 231–60, 472
“accidental” behavior and, 245
contradictory behavior and, 241–42, 244, 248–54
creation of, 242–43
denial and, 244–45
dreams and, 256–57
embracing, 257–58
emotional outbursts and, 244
exploring, 258–59
Extreme Entrepreneur and, 253–54
Fanatic and, 251–52
generations and, 549
integration of, 254–60
Jung on, 242
leaders and, 247
niceness and, 259, 260
overidealization and, 245–46
Passive-Aggressive Charmer and, 250–51
projection and, 246
Rigid Rationalist and, 252–53
Saint and, 250
seeing, 255–57
showing, 259–60
Snob and, 252–53
Tough Guy and, 249–50
Shadow Enabler, 427–29
Shakespeare, William, 81, 85, 144
shamans, 349, 355
Sharp-Hughes Tool Company, 102, 103, 104, 107, 109–10
Shelley, Harriet, 262, 264
Shelley, Mary, 261–71, 284
Jane Williams and, 262–71, 274–76, 286
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 261–70
Shelley, Percy Florence, 261, 264–67, 270

[PAGE 684]
Sherman, William Tecumseh, 167
shortsightedness, 150–71
lost in trivia, 168–69
signs of, and strategies to overcome, 162–69
tactical hell, 165
ticker tape fever, 166–68
unintended consequences, 162–65
Shuttlesworth, Fred, 363, 364
silence, 468
Sixtus IV, Pope, 322, 323
Sixtus V, Pope, 446
smiles, 90
Snob, 252–53
social animals, 24, 25, 30, 42, 188, 189, 280, 410–11, 414, 491
social force, 408–11, 422
social media, 6, 26, 49, 146, 194, 247, 389, 410, 413, 423, 462, 468, 551
aggression and, 491
envy and, 286
grandiosity and, 307
social personality, 391
sociology, 538
Socrates, 162, 199–200, 465
solitary confinement, 409
Sontag, Susan, 355
Sophocles, 498
soul, 229–30
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), 362–63, 365
Southern Improvement Company (SIC), 478–80, 488
South Sea Company, 150–58, 415
Soviet Union, 234
Spain, 168–69, 444–46, 452
Sparta, 13–14, 16–18
spouse, choice of, 118
Spruce Goose, 106
Stalin, Joseph, 37, 54–59
Standard Oil, 478–85, 487–88, 502
standards of excellence, 471
status

[PAGE 685]
need for, 407
seeking through attention, 6
Status Fiend, 280–81
Steinbrenner, George, 281
Stendhal, 88
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 248
Stewart, Martha, 287
Stirrer, 426–27, 432
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 167
Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, The (Stevenson), 248
stress, 372–73, 375–76
relationships in handling of, 112–13
rising pressure, 34–35
strongman, 462
Sublime, 319, 584–86
submission/dominance cues, 86, 91–95, 100
Subtle-Superiority Strategy, 504–5
success
envy and, 283–84
pursuit of, 387–88
sudden, 34, 283
Suetonius, 223
superiority
bias, 31–32
Subtle-Superiority Strategy, 504–5
Superior Man, 346–47
Surin, Jean-Joseph, 60–62
Swann’s Way (Proust), 345
Swift, Jonathan, 153, 154
Sympathy Strategy, 505–6
symptoms, psychosomatic, 94, 220
Syracuse, 17–18
taboos, 141, 373
tactical hell, 165
Talman, William, 280
Teacher, 464
technology, 411, 551, 561, 577
aggression and, 502

[PAGE 686]
grandiosity and, 307
internet, 49, 502
see also social media
terrorism, 161
Thalberg, Irving, 226
theatrical quality of social life, 81, 82
see also role-playing
thinking, masculine and feminine styles of, 350–51
Tiberius, 223–24
ticker tape fever, 166–68
Tidewater Pipeline Company, 482–84
time, 169–71, 555–61
awakening to the shortness of life, 580–81
Time, 232
timidity, 515
Tolstaya, Sonya Behrs, 63–66
Tolstoy, Leo, 63–66
Tom Sawyer (Twain), 191–92
tone, and authority, 466–67
Tough Guy, 249–50
toxic types, 8, 47, 121–27
Big Talker, 124–25
Drama Magnet, 123–24
Easy Moralizer, 126–27
Hyperperfectionist, 121–22, 129
Pampered Prince/Princess, 125
Personalizer, 123, 129
Pleaser, 125–26, 129, 219
Relentless Rebel, 122–23, 129
Savior, 126
Sexualizer, 124–25
tribalism, 6, 423–24, 463
trigger points from early childhood, 32–33
trivia, being lost in, 168–69
troubadours, 559
Truman, Harry, 175
truth, 138, 142
Truth Seeker, 463–64

[PAGE 687]
Tydings, Millard, 175–76
Tyrone, Hugh O’Neill, Earl of, 447
ubiquity, illusion of, 138–39
unconscious, 258
uniqueness, 373–74, 378, 388, 411, 470–71, 516
unintended consequences, 162–65
Ursuline nuns, 59–62
utopia, 140, 306
Valentino, Rudolph, 549
validation, 184, 186
nonverbal, 410
see also self-opinion
Vidal, Gore, 272
Vietnam War, 107, 234, 235, 365, 366, 369, 417, 425, 548
vision, of leaders, 458–59, 465–66
Visionary Artist, 463
visual system, 140
Voltaire, 532
von Sternberg, Josef, 106
Voting Rights Act, 365
voyeurism, 146
Wagner, Richard, 221–22, 246
warfare, 501–3
Washington Post, 235, 236
Watergate scandal, 96, 236–38, 425, 548
Watson, Thomas, 433
Watzlawick, Paul, 197
Wayne, John, 106, 107
Weakland, John H., 197
Wells, Frank, 293–97, 300
Whitman, Walt, 71
Wilde, Oscar, 201
Wilder, Billy, 192
Williams, Edward, 262–67, 269
Williams, Jane, 262–71, 274–76, 286
Wilson, Woodrow, 233
Wise Blood (O’Connor), 565, 568, 59
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 262, 560

[PAGE 688]
Woman to Worship Him, 347–48
women
niceness and, 260
successful, envy of, 284–85
see also gender roles and masculine and feminine traits
Wonderful World of Disney, The, 294
Woods, Tiger, 378
work world, 371–72, 494, 548
world, viewing with expansive attitude, 225
World War II, 104, 175, 318, 417, 545, 548, 554, 560
Chanel and, 135–36
Pearl Harbor attack, 163–64
Wren, Christopher, 279–80
wu-wei, 352
Xenophon, 319, 454, 465
Yahoo!, 298
Yamamoto, Kajiro, 379
Yizhen Middle School (YMS), 391–92, 394, 396, 398–401, 403–5
youth culture, 541, 543, 576–77
zao fan, 394
zeitgeist, 518, 543, 547, 550, 551, 554, 558
Zeus, 19
Zhuge Liang, 162
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

[PAGE 689]
About the Author
Robert Greene, the #1 New York Times bestselling author of The 48
Laws of Power, The 33 Strategies of War, The Art of Seduction, and
Mastery, is an internationally renowned expert on power strategies.
He lives in Los Angeles.

[PAGE 690]
What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.
Sign up now.