chapter 11 for more on this).

chapter 11 for more on this).
If people quit on these tyrants, they are fine with that. This
demonstrates that the individual retains some independence, and they
will find a replacement who will be more submissive, at least for the
time being. They may also increase their difficult behavior to test
certain individuals and get them to quit or submit. Such tyrants may
try to act like helpless children. They are the temperamental artist or
genius type, so naturally brilliant and absentminded. Their pleas for
assistance from you and their urgent need for you to do more seem to
express their vulnerability. They use such feigned weakness to justify
the ugly nature of their tyranny.
It is very hard to strategize against such types, because most often
they are your superiors and have real power over you. They tend to be
hypersensitive and prone to anger, which makes any form of resistance
or inner detachment hard to maintain. Overt rebellion will only make

[PAGE 561]
the situation worse. You must first realize that this strategy of theirs is
more conscious than it appears. They are not weak and helpless but
cunning tyrants. Instead of lingering on anything positive they’ve said
or done, think only of their manipulations and harshness. Your ability
to detach from them emotionally will neutralize the obsessive presence
they try to instill. But in the end nothing really will work, because if, in
their hypersensitivity, they detect your distance, their behavior will
only get worse. The only real counter is to quit and recuperate. No
position is worth such abuse, for the damage to your self-esteem could
take years to recover from.
Controlled Aggression
We are born with a powerful energy that is distinctly human. We can
call it willpower, assertiveness, or even aggression, but it is mixed with
our intelligence and cleverness. It was revealed to us in its purest state
in childhood. This energy made us bold and adventurous, not only
physically but mentally, wanting to explore ideas and soak up
knowledge. It made us actively search for friends with whom we could
explore together. It also made us rather relentless when it came to
solving problems or getting what we wanted. (Children can often be
bold in what they ask for.) It made us open to the world and to new
experiences. And if we felt frustrated and helpless for long enough
periods of time, this same energy could make us unusually combative.
As we get older and we encounter mounting frustrations, resistance
from others, and feelings of impatience for power, some among us may
become chronically aggressive. But another phenomenon is even more
common: we become uncomfortable with and even frightened of that
assertive energy within, and our own potential for aggressive behavior.
Being assertive and adventurous could lead to some failed action,
making us feel exposed and vulnerable. If we express this energy too
much, people may not like us. We could stir up conflict. Perhaps our
parents induced in us as well some shame for our aggressive outbursts.
In any event, we may come to view the aggressive part of the self as
dangerous. But since this energy cannot disappear, it turns inward,
and we create what the great English psychoanalyst Ronald Fairbairn
called the internal saboteur.
The saboteur operates like a persecutor from within, continually
judging and attacking us. If we are about to attempt something, it

[PAGE 562]
reminds us of the potential for failure. It tries to tamp down any
exuberance, because that could open us to criticism from others. It
makes us uncomfortable with strong sensations of pleasure or the
expression of deep emotion. It impels us to tamp down our ambitions,
the better to fit into the group and not stand out. It wants us to retreat
inward, where we can protect ourselves, even if that leads to
depression. And it makes us forge a fake self to present to the world,
one that is humble and self-effacing. In the end, the internal saboteur
works to lower our energy and constrain what we do, making our world
more manageable and predictable but also quite dead. It is the same
goal as the aggressor—gaining control over uncertainty—but through
the opposite means.
The internal saboteur can also have a dampening effect on our
mental powers. It discourages us from being bold and adventurous in
our thinking. We limit our ideas and settle for the conventional
opinions of the group, because that is safer. Creative people display
great aggressiveness in their thinking, as they try out many options
and search for possible solutions. By trying to rid ourselves of any kind
of aggressive impulse, we actually thwart our own creative energies.
Understand: The problem has never been that we humans are
assertive and aggressive. That would be to make a problem of our own
nature. The positive and negative aspects of this energy are but two
sides of the same coin. To try to tamp down the negative, to give
ourselves over to the internal saboteur, only dulls the positive. The real
problem is that we do not know how to harness this energy in an adult,
productive, and prosocial manner. This energy needs to be embraced
as totally human and potentially positive. What we must do is tame
and train it for our own purposes. Instead of being chronically
aggressive, passive-aggressive, or repressed, we can make this energy
focused and rational. Like all forms of energy, when it is concentrated
and sustained, it has so much more force behind it. By following such a
path, we can recover some of that pure spirit we had as children,
feeling bolder, more integrated, and more authentic.
The following are four potentially positive elements of this energy
that we can discipline and use, improving what evolution has bestowed
on us.
Ambition: To say you’re ambitious in the world today is often to
admit to something slightly dirty, perhaps revealing too much self-

[PAGE 563]
absorption. But think back to your childhood and youth—you
inevitably entertained big dreams and ambitions for yourself. You were
going to make a mark in this world in some way. You played out in
your mind various scenes of future glory. This was a natural impulse
on your part, and you felt no shame. Then, when you got older, you
probably tried to stifle this. Either you kept your ambitions secret and
acted modestly or you actually stopped dreaming altogether, trying to
avoid seeming self-absorbed and being judged for this.
Much of this sneering at ambition and ambitious people in our
culture actually stems from a great deal of envy at the
accomplishments of others. Tamping down your youthful ambitions is
a sign that you don’t like or respect yourself; you no longer believe you
deserve to have the power and recognition you once dreamed about.
That doesn’t make you more adult, simply more likely to fail—by
lowering your ambitions, you limit your possibilities and diminish your
energy. In any event, in trying to appear unambitious, you are just as
self-absorbed as anyone else; being so humble and saintly is your
ambition, and you want to make a display of it.
Some people remain ambitious as they get older, but their
ambitions are too vague. They want success, money, and attention.
Because of such vagueness, it is hard for them to ever feel they have
satisfied their desires. What constitutes enough money or success or
power? Not sure of what exactly they want, they cannot put a limit to
their desires, and although it is not the case in every instance, this can
lead them to aggressive behavior, as they continually want more and
don’t know when to stop.
Instead, what you must do is embrace that childish part of you,
revisit your earliest ambitions, adapt them to your current reality, and
make them as specific as possible. You want to write a particular book,
expressing some deeply held ideas or emotions; you want to start the
kind of business that has always excited you; you want to create a
cultural or political movement to address a particular cause. This
specific ambition might be grand enough, but you can visualize quite
clearly the end point and how to get there. The more clearly you see
what you want, the likelier you are to realize it. Your ambitions may
involve challenges, but they should not be so far above your capacity
that you only set yourself up for failure.

[PAGE 564]
Once your goal is realized, however long that takes, you now turn to
a new ambition, a new project, feeling tremendous satisfaction that
you reached the last one. You do not stop in this upward process,
building momentum. The key is the level of desire and aggressive
energy you put into each ambitious project. You don’t infect yourself
with doubts and guilt; you are in harmony with your nature, and you
will be amply rewarded for that.
Persistence: If you observe infants, you will notice how willful and
relentless they are when they want something. Such persistence is
natural to us, but it is a quality that we tend to lose as we get older and
our self-confidence fades. This is often what happens later in life when
we face a problem or some resistance: We summon up the energy to
attack the problem, but in the back of our mind, we have some doubts
—are we up to the task? This ever-so-slight diminishment in self-belief
translates into a reduction in the energy with which we attack the
problem. This leads to a less effective result, which raises the volume of
the background doubts even more, lessening the effect of our next
action or blow. At some point, we admit defeat and give up. But we
inevitably give up too soon. We surrender inwardly long before we
surrender outwardly.
What you must understand is the following: almost nothing in the
world can resist persistent human energy. Things will yield if we strike
enough blows with enough force. Look at how many great people in
history have succeeded in this way. It was painstaking persistence over
several years that allowed Thomas Edison to invent the proper form of
the lightbulb, and Marie Curie to discover radium. They simply
continued where others had given up. Over the course of ten years, it
was through continual thought experiments, day and night, exploring
every possible solution, that Albert Einstein finally came up with the
theory of relativity. In the spiritual realm, the great eighteenth-century
Zen master Hakuin was able to finally reach full enlightenment, and
revive a dying branch of Zen, because he applied himself to the task
with relentless persistence over the course of some twenty years. This
is aggressive energy, undivided from within, aimed with laser focus at
a problem or resistance.
It is because the infant or the scientist or the aspiring practitioner of
Zen wants something so badly that nothing will deter them. They
understand the power of persistence, and so it becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy—knowing its value, they are able to summon up the energy

[PAGE 565]
and self-belief to solve the problem. They are adopting Hannibal’s
motto: “I will either find a way, or make a way.” You must do the same.
The trick is to want something badly enough that nothing will stop you
or dull your energy. Fill yourself with the requisite desire to reach a
goal. Train yourself to not give up as easily as you did in the past. Keep
attacking from new angles, in new ways. Drop the background doubts
and continue striking with full force, knowing that you can break
through anything if you don’t let up. Once you sense the power in this
form of attack, you will keep returning to it.
Fearlessness: We are bold creatures by nature. As children, we were
not afraid to ask for more or assert our will. We were remarkably
resilient and fearless in so many ways. Timidity is a quality we
generally acquire. It is a function of our mounting fears as we get older
and a loss of confidence in our powers to get what we want. We
become overly concerned with how people perceive us and worry what
they will think if we stand up for ourselves. We internalize their
doubts. We become afraid of any kind of conflict or confrontation,
which will churn up emotions and lead to consequences we cannot
predict or control. We develop the habit of backing down. We don’t say
what we feel even when it would be appropriate, and we fail to set
boundaries to people’s harmful behavior. We find it hard to ask for a
raise or a promotion or the respect due to us. Losing our bold spirit, a
positive form of aggression, is losing a deep part of our self, and it is
inevitably painful.
You must try to recover the fearlessness you once possessed,
through incremental steps. The key is to first convince yourself that
you deserve good and better things in life. Once you feel that, you can
start by training yourself to speak up or even talk back to people in
everyday situations, if they are proving to be insensitive. You are
learning to defend yourself. You might call people on their passive-
aggressive behavior, or not be so timid in expressing an opinion that
they may not share or in telling them what you really think of their bad
ideas. You will often come to realize that you have less to fear in doing
this than you had imagined. You might even gain some respect. You try
this out in small ways every day.
Once you lose your fear in these less dramatic encounters, you can
start to ramp it up. You can make greater demands on people that they
treat you well, or honor the quality work that you do. You do this
without a complaining or defensive tone. You make it clear to bullies

[PAGE 566]
that you are not as meek as you seem, or as easily manipulated as
others. You can be as relentless as they are in defending your interests.
In negotiations, you can train yourself not to settle for less but to make
bolder demands and see how far you can push the other side.
You can apply this growing boldness to your work. You will not be
so afraid to create something that is unique, or to face criticism and
failure. You will take reasonable risks and test yourself out. All of this
must be built up slowly, like a muscle that has atrophied, so that you
don’t risk a large-scale battle or aggressive reaction before you have
toughened yourself up. But once you develop this muscle, you will gain
the confidence that you can meet any adversity in life with a fearless
attitude.
Anger: It is natural and healthy for you to feel anger at certain types
of people—those who unfairly block your advancement, the many fools
who have power but are lazy and incompetent, the sanctimonious
critics who espouse their clichés with so much conviction and attack
you without understanding your views. The list could go on forever.
Feeling such anger can be a powerful motivating device to take some
kind of action. It can fill you with valuable energy. You should embrace
it and use it throughout your life for such a purpose. What might make
you hold back or tamp down your anger is that it can seem to be such a
toxic and ugly emotion, as it often is in our culture.
What makes anger toxic is the degree to which it is disconnected
from reality. People channel their natural frustrations into anger at
some vague enemy or scapegoat, conjured up and spread by
demagogues. They imagine grand conspiracies behind simple
inescapable realities, such as taxes or globalism or the changes that are
part of all historical periods. They believe that certain forces in the
world are to blame for their lack of success or power, instead of their
own impatience and lack of effort. There is no thought behind their
anger, and so it leads nowhere or it becomes destructive.
You must do the opposite. Your anger is directed at very specific
individuals and forces. You analyze the emotion—are you certain that
your frustration does not stem from your own inadequacies? Do you
really understand the cause of the anger and what it should be directed
at? In addition to determining if it is justified and where the anger
should be directed, you also analyze the best way to channel this
emotion, the best strategy for defeating your opponents. Your anger is

[PAGE 567]
controlled, realistic, and targeted at the actual source of the problem,
never losing sight of what initially inspired the emotion.
Most people engage in some cathartic release of their anger, some
giant protest, and then it goes away and they slip back into
complacency or become bitter. You want to cool your anger, bring it
more to a simmer than a boil. Your controlled anger will help give you
the resolve and patience you will need for what might be a longer
struggle than you had imagined. Let the unfairness or injustice lie in
the back of your mind and keep you energized. The real satisfaction
comes not in one spasm of emotion but in actually defeating the bully
and exposing the narrow-minded for who they are.
Do not be afraid to use your anger in your work, particularly if it is
allied to some cause or if you are expressing yourself through
something creative. It is often the sense of contained rage that makes
an orator so effective; it was the source of much of the charisma of
Malcolm X. Look at the most lasting and compelling works of art, and
you can often read or feel the restrained anger behind them. We are all
so careful and correct that when we feel the carefully channeled anger
in a film or a book or wherever it is, it is like a fresh wind. It attracts all
of our own frustrations and resentments and lets them out. We
recognize that it is something real and authentic. In your expressive
work, never shy away from anger but capture and channel it, letting it
breathe into the work a sense of life and movement. In giving
expression to such anger, you will always find an audience.
Power is required for communication. To stand before an indifferent or
hostile group and have one’s say, or to speak honestly to a friend truths that
go deep and hurt, these require self-affirmation, self-assertion, and even at
times aggression.
—Rollo May

[PAGE 568]
17
Seize the Historical Moment
The Law of Generational Myopia
You are born into a generation that defines who you are more than
you can imagine. Your generation wants to separate itself from
the previous one and set a new tone for the world. In the process, it
forms certain tastes, values, and ways of thinking that you as an
individual internalize. As you get older, these generational values and
ideas tend to close you off from other points of view, constraining
your mind. Your task is to understand as deeply as possible this
powerful influence on who you are and how you see the world.
Knowing in depth the spirit of your generation and the times you live
in, you will be better able to exploit the zeitgeist. You will be the one to
anticipate and set the trends that your generation hungers for. You
will free your mind from the mental constraints placed on you by
your generation, and you will become more of the individual you
imagine yourself to be, with all the power that freedom will bring
you.
The Rising Tide
On May 10, 1774, sixty-four-year-old King Louis XV of France died,
and though the country went into the requisite mourning for its king,
many French people felt a sense of relief. He had ruled France for over
fifty years. He left a country that was prosperous, the preeminent
power in Europe, but things were changing—the expanding middle
class craved power, the peasantry was restless, and people in general
yearned for a new direction. And so it was with great hope and
affection that the French people turned to their new ruler, King Louis
XVI, the grandson of the deceased king, who was a mere twenty years

[PAGE 569]
old at the time. He and his young wife, Marie Antoinette, represented a
new generation that would certainly revitalize the country and the
monarchy itself.
The young king, however, did not share the optimism of his
subjects. In fact, at moments he was on the verge of panic. Ever since
he was a boy, he had dreaded the possibility that he might become
king. Compared with his affable grandfather, Louis was quite shy
around people; he was an awkward young man, always uncertain and
fearful of making mistakes. He felt the august role of French king to be
beyond his capacities. Now, having ascended the throne, he could no
longer disguise his insecurities from the court and from the French
people. But as he prepared for his coronation, to take place in the
spring of 1775, Louis began to feel differently. He had decided to study
the coronation ritual itself so that he could be prepared and not make
mistakes; and what he learned actually filled him with the confidence
that he desperately needed.
According to legend, a dove sent from the Holy Spirit had deposited
some sacred oil that was kept at a church in the town of Reims and was
used to anoint all kings of France from the ninth century on. Once
anointed with this oil, the king was suddenly elevated above the ranks
of mere mortals and imbued with a divine nature, becoming God’s
lieutenant on earth. The ritual represented the marriage of the new
king with the church and the French people. In his body and spirit, the
king would now embody the entire populace, their two fates
intertwined. And, sanctified by God, the king could depend on the
Lord’s guidance and protection.
By the 1770s, many French people and progressive clergymen had
come to see this ritual as a relic of a superstitious past. But Louis felt
the opposite. To him, the ancientness of the rite was comforting.
Believing in its significance would be the means to overcome his fears
and doubts. He would be buoyed by a profound sense of mission, his
divine nature made real by the anointment.
Louis decided to reenact this sacred ritual in its more original form.
And he would go even further. At the palace of Versailles he noticed
that many of the paintings and statues of Louis XIV associated him
with Roman gods, a way to symbolically strengthen the image of the
French monarchy as something ancient and unshakable. The new king
decided he would surround himself with similar imagery for the public

[PAGE 570]
part of the coronation, overwhelming his subjects with the spectacle
and the symbols he had chosen.
—
Louis XVI’s coronation took place on June 11, 1775, and in the crowd
outside the cathedral that warm day was a most unlikely tourist—a
fifteen-year-old youth named Georges-Jacques Danton. He was a
student at a boarding school in the town of Troyes. His family had
come from the peasantry, but his father had managed to become a
lawyer, raising the family up into the expanding French middle class.
His father had died when Danton was three, and his mother had raised
him with the hope that Danton would continue in his father’s
footsteps, securing a solid career.
Danton was quite strange-looking, if not downright ugly. He was
unusually large for his age, with an enormous head and a rather
monstrous face. Growing up on the family farm, he had twice been
attacked by bulls, their horns splitting his upper lip and cracking his
nose. Some people found him frightening, but many were charmed by
his youthful exuberance and could ignore the face. The boy was simply
fearless, always in search of adventure, and it was his bold spirit that
attracted people to him, particularly among his classmates.
At the school he was attending, the liberal priests who ran it had
decided to award a prize to the student who wrote an essay that best
described the upcoming coronation, its necessity and meaning at a
time when France was trying to modernize itself. Danton was not the
intellectual type. He preferred swimming in the nearby river and any
other kind of physical activity. The one subject that excited him was
history, particularly ancient Rome. His favorite historical figure was
the great Roman lawyer and orator Cicero. He identified with Cicero,
who also came from the middle class. He memorized Cicero’s speeches
and developed a love for oratory. With his powerful speaking voice, he
was a natural at the art. But he was not very good at writing.
He desperately wanted to win the essay prize—it would instantly
elevate him among the ranks of fellow students. He had reasoned,
however, that the only way he could compensate for his less-than-
stellar literary skills was to witness the coronation firsthand and give a
vivid description of it. He also felt a strange affinity with the young

[PAGE 571]
king: they were not far apart in age, and both were large and
considered decidedly unhandsome.
Playing hooky to get to Reims, only eighty miles away, was just the
kind of adventure that had always attracted him. He had told his
friends, “I want to see how a king is made.” And so he had snuck off to
Reims the day before the coronation and had arrived just in time. He
moved through the throng of French people congregating outside the
cathedral. Guards brandishing tall pikes held them back. Only the
nobility was allowed inside. Danton pushed as far forward as he could,
and then he spotted the king, wearing the most spectacular ceremonial
robe encrusted with diamonds and gold, making his way up the steps.
There was the pretty queen following him in a splendid gown, her hair
piled impossibly high, followed by other members of her entourage.
From a distance, they were all like figures from another era, so
different from anybody he had ever seen before.
He waited patiently outside for the end of the ritual, at which point
the king reemerged, now sporting a crown. For a brief moment he got a
closer look at Louis’s face as he passed by, and he was surprised to find
that the king seemed quite ordinary, despite the robes and jewels. The
king then got into the most elaborate carriage imaginable, named the
Sacre. It was like something out of a fairy tale. It was built for the
coronation and designed to represent the chariot of Apollo, glistening
like the sun (the sun being the symbol of the French king), and it was
enormous. On all sides it featured gold statuettes of Roman gods. On
the door panel facing Danton, he could see an elaborate painting of
Louis XVI as a Roman emperor atop a cloud, beckoning the French
people below him. Strangest of all, the carriage itself sported a large
bronze crown.
The Sacre was meant to serve as the very symbol of the monarchy,
dazzling and mythical. It was quite a sight, but for some reason it
seemed oddly out of place—too large, too bright, and when the king got
in, it seemed to swallow him up. Was it magnificent or was it
grotesque? Danton could not decide.
Danton returned to school later that same day, his head spinning
with all of these strange images. Inspired by what he had witnessed, he
wrote his best essay yet and won the prize.
In the years after graduating from the school in Troyes, Danton
would make his mother proud. In 1780 he moved to Paris to clerk in

[PAGE 572]
the law courts. Within a few years, he passed the bar exam and became
a practicing lawyer. In court, with his booming voice and oratorical
skills, he naturally commanded attention and quickly rose through the
ranks. And as he mingled with his fellow lawyers and read the
newspapers, he detected something strange going on in France: a
growing discontent with the king, the profligate queen, and the
arrogant upper classes, whom the great thinkers of the day were
ridiculing in their plays and books.
The main problem was the country’s finances—France seemed
perpetually on the brink of running out of money. At the root of this
was France’s vastly antiquated financial structure. The French people
were subject to all kinds of onerous taxes that dated back to feudal
times, but the clergy and the nobility were largely exempt from any
such burdens. Taxes on the French lower and middle classes could
never bring in enough revenue, especially considering the lavish
expenditures of the French court, which had only gotten worse with
Queen Marie Antoinette’s elaborate parties and love of finery.
As the money supply ran short and the price of bread kept rising,
and with millions of people facing starvation, riots began to break out
throughout the countryside and even in Paris. And amid all of this
turmoil, the young king was proving to be too indecisive to handle the
pressure.
In 1787, as the financial situation worsened, the opportunity of a
lifetime came to Danton—a position as a lawyer on the King’s Council,
with a rather nice bump in salary. Wanting to marry a young woman
named Gabrielle, whose father opposed the marriage because Danton
did not earn enough, he accepted the position on the council, despite
his fears that he was joining a sinking ship. Two days later he married
Gabrielle.
Danton did his job well but found himself increasingly absorbed by
the turmoil in Paris. He joined a club called the Cordeliers. Its
members were an odd mix of bohemian artists and political agitators.
It was located near his apartment, so he began to spend a great part of
his day there, and soon he was participating in the raucous debates
about the future of France that took place at the club. He felt a strange
new spirit in the air, a boldness that made people suddenly say things
they could never have said a few years before about the monarchy. He
found it exciting and irresistible. He began to give his own fiery

[PAGE 573]
speeches, focusing on the brutality of the upper classes, and he basked
in the attention he received.
In 1788 he was offered a higher position on the King’s Council, and
he turned it down. He told the king’s minister who presented the offer
that the monarchy was doomed: “This is no longer about modest
reforms,” he said. “We are more than ever on the brink of
revolution. . . . Can’t you see the avalanche coming?”
In the spring of 1789, Louis was forced to call a national assembly to
deal with the looming bankruptcy. The assembly was known as the
Estates General. It was an institution meant to deal with a national
crisis, but always as a measure of last resort, the previous one having
been held in 1614, after the death of King Henry IV. It brought together
representatives of the three estates of France—the nobility, the clergy,
and the tax-paying commoners. Although the vast majority of French
people were to be represented by members of the Third Estate, the
power of the assembly was heavily tilted in favor of the nobility and
clergy. Nevertheless, the French people held great hopes for the
Estates General, and Louis had been extremely reluctant to call for it.
Only a month before the convening of the Estates General, riots in
Paris had broken out over the price of bread, and royal troops had shot
into the crowds, killing dozens. Danton had witnessed the bloodshed
and he felt a turning point in the mood of the people, particularly the
lower classes, and in himself. He shared their desperation and anger;
they could no longer be placated with the usual rhetoric. He began to
address the angry crowds on street corners, attracting followers and
making a name for himself. To a friend who was surprised at this new
direction in his life, he responded that it was like seeing a strong tide in
the river, jumping in, and letting it carry him where it might.
—
As he prepared for the convening of the Estates General, King Louis
could barely contain his resentment and anger. In the years since he
had become king, various finance ministers had warned him of an
impending crisis if France did not reform its tax system. He had
understood this and had tried to initiate reforms, but the nobility and
clergy, fearing where this might lead, had become so hostile to such
ideas that the king had been forced to back down. And now, with the

[PAGE 574]
state’s coffers nearly empty, the nobility and the Third Estate were
holding him hostage, making him convene the Estates General and
putting him in the position of begging for funds from his people.
The Estates General was not a traditional part of French
government; it was an anomaly, a challenge to the divine right of the
king, a recipe for anarchy. Who knew what was best for France—his
subjects, with their million different opinions? The nobility, with their
own narrow interests and hunger to grab more power? No, only the
king could navigate the nation through this crisis. He had to regain the
upper hand over these rowdy children.
The king decided upon a plan: he would impress upon them all the
majesty of the monarchy and its absolute necessity as the supreme
power in France. To do so, he would hold the Estates General at
Versailles, something his advisers warned him not to do, considering
Versailles’s closeness to Paris and all its agitators. Louis reasoned that
most of the delegates of the Third Estate came from the middle classes
and were relatively moderate. Amid the grandeur and all the symbols
of the French monarchy, the members of the Third Estate could not
help but think of what Louis XIV, the builder of Versailles, had created
and how much they owed the monarchy for transforming France into a
great power. He would hold an opening ceremony that would rival his
coronation and remind all of the estates of the divine origin of his
kingship.
Having impressed them with the weight of the past, he would then
agree to some reforms of the tax system, which the Third Estate would
certainly be grateful for. At the same time, however, he would make it
clear that under no circumstances would the monarchy or the first two
estates relinquish any of their other powers or privileges. In this way,
the government would get its necessary funds through taxes, and the
traditions he was meant to uphold would remain unchanged.
The opening ceremonies went just as he had planned, but to his
dismay the deputies of the Third Estate seemed rather uninterested in
the splendors of the palace and all of the pomp. They were barely
respectful during the religious ceremonies. They did not applaud very
warmly during his opening speech. The tax reforms he proposed were
not enough, in their eyes. And as the weeks went by, the members of
the Third Estate became increasingly demanding, its members now
insisting that the three estates have equal power.

[PAGE 575]
When the king refused to accept their demands, they did the
unthinkable—they declared themselves the true representatives of the
French people, equal to the king, and they called their body the
National Assembly. They proposed the formation of a constitutional
monarchy, and they claimed to have the overwhelming support of the
country. If they did not get their way, they would make sure the
government would be unable to raise the necessary taxes. At one point,
as the king grew furious at this form of blackmail, he ordered the Third
Estate to disband from their meeting place, and they refused,
disobeying a royal decree. Never had any French king witnessed such
insubordination from the lower classes.
As he faced a growing uprising throughout the country, Louis
sensed the urgency of nipping the problem in the bud. He decided to
forget any attempts at conciliation and instead resort to force. He
called in the army to establish order in Paris and elsewhere. But on
July 13 messengers from Paris relayed some disturbing news: the
Parisians, anticipating Louis’s use of the military, were quickly arming
themselves, looting military stockades. The French troops that had
moved in to quell the rebellion were unreliable, many of them refusing
to fire on their compatriots. The following day, a vast contingent of
Parisians marched on the Bastille, the royal prison in Paris that was a
symbol of the most oppressive practices of the monarchy, and they
took control of it.
Paris was in the hands of the people now, and there was nothing
Louis could do. He watched with horror as the National Assembly, still
meeting in Versailles, quickly voted to eliminate the various privileges
enjoyed by the nobility and clergy. In the name of the people, they
voted to take over the Catholic Church and auction off to the public the
vast lands that it owned. They went even further, proclaiming that
henceforth all French citizens were equal. The monarchy would be
allowed to survive, but the people and the king were to share power.
In the following weeks, as the courtiers, shocked and terrified by
these events, quickly fled Versailles to safe regions or to other
countries, the king could now feel the full brunt of what had happened
in the past few months. He wandered the halls of the palace, virtually
alone. The paintings and august symbols of Louis XIV stared back at
him in mockery of all that he had allowed under his rule.

[PAGE 576]
Somehow he had to retake control of France, and the only way to do
so was to lean even more on the military, finding those regiments that
had remained loyal to him. In mid-September he recalled the Flanders
Regiment—containing some of the best soldiers in the country and
renowned for its royalist sympathies—to Versailles. On the evening of
October 1, the king’s personal guard decided to host a banquet in
honor of the Flanders Regiment. All of the courtiers who had remained
in the palace, along with the king and the queen, attended the banquet.
The soldiers became drunk. They shouted cheers to the king and
oaths to the monarchy. They sang ballads ridiculing the French people
in the raunchiest terms. They grabbed handfuls of the tricolor badges
and ribbons that symbolized the revolution and trampled them with
their boots. The king and the queen, so despondent of late, took this all
in with undisguised delight—it was a taste of years gone by, when the
very sight of the royal couple inspired such displays of affection. But
news of what had transpired at this banquet quickly spread to Paris,
and it caused outrage and panic. Parisians of all classes suspected that
the king was planning some sort of countercoup. They imagined the
nobility returning under Louis’s command and exacting revenge on the
French people.
Within days, the king learned that thousands of Parisians were now
marching on Versailles. They were armed and dragging cannons. He
thought of escaping with his family but hesitated. Soon it was too late,
as the mob arrived. On the morning of October 6, a group of citizens
penetrated into the palace, killing everyone in their path. They
demanded that Louis and his family be escorted back to Paris, so that
the French citizens could keep an eye on him and ensure his loyalty to
the new order.
Louis had no choice: he and his traumatized family piled into a
single carriage. As they made their way to Paris, surrounded by the
crowd, Louis could see the heads of the king’s personal guard paraded
on long pikes. What shocked him even more was the sight of so many
men and women surrounding the carriage, dressed in rags, thinned by
hunger, pressing their faces to the window and swearing at him and
the queen in the vilest language. He could not recognize his own
subjects. These were not the French people he had known. They must
be outside agitators, brought in by enemies to destroy the monarchy.
Somehow the world had gone mad.

[PAGE 577]
In Paris the king, his family, and the few courtiers who had
remained with them were housed in the Tuileries, a royal residence
that had been uninhabited for over a hundred years.
Within a week of his arrival in Paris, the king received a visit from a
strange man whose face and manner frightened him. It was Georges-
Jacques Danton, now one of the leaders of the French Revolution. On
behalf of the French people, he had come to welcome the king to Paris.
He explained that he had been a member of the King’s Council, and he
reassured the king that the people were grateful for his submission to
their will and that there was still an important part for him to play as a
monarch who swore allegiance to a new constitution.
Louis could barely listen. He was transfixed by the man’s enormous
head, by the strange outfit he wore (black satin breeches over white
silk stockings, and buckled shoes, a mix of fashion styles Louis had
never seen before), and by his whole manner, his fast way of talking,
the lack of awe and respect in the king’s presence. He bowed graciously
before the king, but he refused to kiss his hand, quite a breach of
protocol. So this was a revolutionary, a man of the people? Louis had
never met such a fellow, and he found the experience decidedly
unpleasant.
—
During the summer months of 1789, Danton had largely supported the
decisions of the National Assembly, but he had remained wary of the
aristocracy and wanted to make sure they had permanently lost their
privileges. The nobility was the source of the country’s misery, and the
French must never forget this. He had become one of the principal
fomenters against the upper classes, and as such he had earned the
mistrust of the more moderate and bourgeois leaders of the revolution,
who wanted to go slowly. To them, Danton was like a ranting,
monstrous ogre, and they had excluded him from their social circles
and any official position in the new government under formation.
Feeling ostracized and perhaps recalling his own peasant roots,
Danton had come to increasingly identify with the sans-culottes
(“without breeches”), members of the lowest classes in France and the
most revolutionary in spirit. As the news of the scandalous behavior of
the Flanders Regiment on October 1 had reached Paris, Danton had

[PAGE 578]
been one of the key agitators for the march on Versailles, and with its
success he had become the leader of the Cordeliers. And it was in that
capacity that he had paid a visit to the Tuileries, as much to discern the
king’s degree of support for the new constitution as to welcome him.
Danton could not help but recall the coronation he had attended
over fourteen years earlier, with all of its pomp, for despite everything
that had happened in the last few months, the king seemed bent on re-
creating the protocol and ceremony of Versailles. He wore his royal
outfit, with its sash and various medals attached to his coat. He
insisted on the old formalities, and he kept his attendants in their
elaborate uniforms. It was all so empty, so disconnected from what was
going on. Danton was polite. He still felt a strange sympathy for the
king, but now, as he scrutinized him, all he could see was a relic of the
past. He doubted the king’s allegiance to the new order. He left the
meeting more certain than ever that the French monarchy had become
obsolete.
In the months that followed, the king professed his loyalty to the
new constitution, but Danton suspected that Louis was playing a
double game, still plotting to bring the monarchy and nobility back to
power. A coalition of armies from other countries in Europe was now
waging open war against the revolution, determined to rescue the king
and restore the old order. And Danton felt certain that the king was in
communication with them.
Then in June of 1791 came the most startling news of all: the king
and his family had somehow escaped from Paris in a carriage. A few
days later they were caught. It would all have been rather comical if it
hadn’t been so alarming. The family members had been dressed like
everyday members of the bourgeoisie out on holiday, but they had
ridden in a splendid carriage that did not match their outfits and that
called attention to itself. They had been recognized, captured, and
returned to the capital.
Now Danton sensed that his moment had arrived. The liberals and
moderates in the revolution were trying to maintain that the king was
innocent, that he had been duped into escaping or even abducted. They
feared what would happen to France if the monarchy was abolished
and how the foreign armies, now within the country’s borders, would
react if anything happened to the king. But to Danton this was absurd.
They were merely postponing the inevitable. The monarchy had lost its

[PAGE 579]
meaning and purpose; the king had revealed himself to be a traitor,
and they must not be afraid to say so. It was time, he proclaimed, for
France to declare itself a republic and get rid of the monarchy once and
for all.
His call for a republic began to resonate, particularly among the
sans-culottes. As a sign of his growing influence, Danton was elected to
his first official position—deputy prosecutor for the commune in
charge of Paris—and he began to fill the commune with his
sympathizers, preparing for something large.
The following summer a large contingent of sans-culottes from
Marseilles was in Paris to celebrate the third anniversary of the
revolution. The men from Marseilles, enthused by Danton’s calls for a
republic, placed themselves under his charge, and throughout June
and July they marched through Paris singing hymns to the revolution
and spreading Danton’s demand for the formation of a republic. Each
day more and more people joined the men from Marseilles. Quietly
planning his coup, Danton gained control of the commune. Its
members now voted to lift the blockade on the various bridges of Paris
leading to the Tuileries from the Left Bank, effectively ending any
protection for the royal family, as crowds could now march straight to
the palace.
On the morning of August 10, alarm bells rang out throughout the
city, and accompanied by a steady drumbeat, an enormous contingent
of Parisians marched across several bridges to invade the Tuileries.
Most of the guards protecting the palace scattered, and soon the royal
family was forced to flee for their lives, taking refuge in the nearby hall
where the National Assembly met. The crowd quickly massacred the
remaining soldiers guarding the palace and took it over.
Danton’s gambit had worked—the people had spoken and the
National Assembly voted to end the monarchy, stripping the king and
his family of any powers and protections that had remained. In one
blow, Danton had put an end to the longest-lasting and most powerful
monarchy in Europe. The king and his family were shuttled to the
Temple, a medieval priory that would serve as their private prison as
the new government decided their fate. Danton was now named
minister of justice, and he was the de facto leader of the new Republic
of France.

[PAGE 580]
—
At the Temple, Louis found himself separated from his family, awaiting
trial for treason in December. He was now to be known as Louis Capet
(the family name of the founder of the French tenth-century kingship
that would end with Louis), a commoner with no privileges. Mostly
alone, he had time to reflect on the traumas of the past three and a half
years. If only the French people had kept their faith in him, he would
have found a way to solve all of the problems. He was still certain that
godless demagogues and outside agitators had spoiled the people’s
natural love for him.
The revolutionaries had recently discovered a stash of papers that
Louis had hidden in a safe in a wall in the Tuileries, and among them
were letters that revealed how deeply he had conspired with foreign
powers to overturn the revolution. He was certain now to be sentenced
to death, and he prepared himself for this.
For his trial in front of the assembly, Louis Capet wore a simple
coat, the kind any middle-class citizen would sport. He now had a
beard. He looked sad and exhausted, and hardly like a king. But
whatever sympathy his judges had had for him quickly vanished as
prosecutors read out the many charges against him, including how he
had conspired to overturn the revolution. A month later the private
citizen Capet was sentenced to die at the guillotine, Danton himself
casting one of the deciding votes.
Louis was determined to show a brave face. On the morning of
January 21, a cold and windy day, he was transported to the Place de la
Révolution, where an enormous crowd had gathered to witness the
execution. They watched in stunned amazement as the former king
had his hands tied and his hair cut like any ordinary criminal. He
climbed the stairs to the guillotine, and before kneeling at the block, he
cried out, “People, I die innocent! I pardon those who sentenced me. I
pray God my blood does not fall again over France.”
As the blade fell, he emitted a horrifying cry. The executioner held
up the king’s head for all to see. After a few cries of “Vive la nation,” a
deathly silence fell over the crowd. Minutes later they rushed to the
scaffold to dip their hands in Louis’s blood and buy locks of his hair.

[PAGE 581]
—
As the leader of the French Revolution, Danton now faced two rather
daunting forces: the invading armies that kept pressing closer to Paris
and the restiveness of the French citizens, many of whom clamored for
revenge on the aristocracy and all counterrevolutionaries. To meet the
enemy armies, Danton unleashed an enormous citizen army of
millions that he had created, and in the first few months of battle these
new French forces turned the tide of the war.
To channel the people’s taste for revenge, he set up a revolutionary
tribunal to bring quick justice to those suspected of trying to restore
the monarchy. The tribunal initiated what would become known as the
Terror, as it sent thousands of suspects to the guillotine, often on the
flimsiest of charges.
Shortly after the execution of the king, Danton traveled to Belgium
to help oversee the war effort on that front. While there, he received
the news that his beloved wife, Gabrielle, had died in premature
childbirth. He felt horribly guilty for not being by her side in that
moment, and the thought that he had no chance to say good-bye to her
and that he would never see her face again was unbearable. Without
thinking of the consequences, he abandoned his mission in Belgium
and hurried back to France.
By the time he arrived, his wife had been dead for a week and
buried in the public cemetery. Overwhelmed with grief and the desire
to see her one more time, he hurried to the cemetery, bringing along
with him a friend and some shovels. On a moonless, rainy night, they
managed to find the grave. He dug and he dug, and with his friend’s
help, he lifted the casket out of the ground and, with much effort,
finally pried the lid off. He gasped at the sight of her bloodless face. He
pulled her out, hugging her tightly to his body, begging her to forgive
him. He kissed her again and again on her cold lips. After several
hours, he finally returned her to the ground.
In the months to come, something seemed to have changed in
Danton. Had it been the loss of his wife, or was it the guilt he now felt
for having unleashed the Terror within France? He had ridden the
wave of the revolution to the pinnacle of power, but now he wanted it
to go in another direction. He became less engaged in affairs of state

[PAGE 582]
and was no longer in favor of the Terror. Maximilien Robespierre, his
main rival for power, noticed the change and began to spread the
rumor that Danton had lost his revolutionary fervor and could no
longer be trusted. Robespierre’s campaign had effect: when it came
time to elect members to the highest governing body, the Committee of
Public Safety, Danton did not receive enough votes and Robespierre
packed it with his sympathizers.
Danton now openly worked to put an end to the Terror, through
speeches and pamphlets, but this only played into the hands of his
rival. On March 30, 1794, Danton was arrested for treason and brought
before the revolutionary tribunal. It seemed ironic that the tribunal he
had formed now held his fate in its hands. The charges against him
were based on pure innuendo, but Robespierre made certain he was
found guilty and sentenced to death. Upon hearing the sentence, he
yelled at his judges, “My name is engraved on every institution of the
revolution—the army, the committees, the tribunal. I have killed
myself!”
That same afternoon he and other condemned men were put in
carts and led to the Place de la Révolution. Along the way, Danton
passed the residence where Robespierre lived. “You’re next,” Danton
shouted in his booming voice, pointing his finger at Robespierre’s
apartment. “You will follow me!”
Danton was the last one to be executed that day. An enormous
crowd had followed the cart, and now they were quiet as he was led up
the stairs. He could not help but think of Louis, whom he had
reluctantly sent to the guillotine, and the many former friends who had
died during the Terror. It had taken a few months, but he had grown
sick of all the bloodshed, and he could sense the crowd before him was
feeling the same way. As he laid his neck on the block, he shouted to
the executioner, “Make sure you show my head to the people. It is
worth a look!”
After the execution of Danton, Robespierre unleashed what became
known as the Great Terror. During four tumultuous months, the
tribunal sent close to twenty thousand French men and women to the
guillotine. But Danton had anticipated the shift in mood: the French
public had had enough of the executions, and they turned against
Robespierre with remarkable speed. In late July, in a heated meeting
at the assembly, its members voted to arrest Robespierre. He tried to

[PAGE 583]
defend himself, but the words came out haltingly. One member
shouted, “It is the blood of Danton that chokes you!” The following
morning, without a trial, Robespierre was guillotined, and days later
the assembly abolished the revolutionary tribunal.
—
At around the time of Robespierre’s execution, the new leaders of the
revolution were looking for ways to drum up funds for the various
emergencies France was facing, and someone mentioned the recent
rediscovery of Louis’s magnificent coronation carriage, the Sacre.
Perhaps they could sell it. A few of them went to inspect it, and they
were aghast at what they perceived as its sheer hideousness. One
deputy described it as “a monstrous assemblage built of the people’s
gold and an excess of flattery.” All agreed that no one would buy such a
grotesquerie. They had all of the gold from the coach removed and
melted, sending it to the treasury. They dispatched the salvaged bronze
to the republic’s foundries to help forge some much-needed cannons.
When it came to the painted panels on the doors, with all of their
mythological symbols, they found them too weird for anyone’s tastes
and promptly had them burned.
• • •
Interpretation: Let us look momentarily at the prerevolutionary
world in France through the eyes of King Louis XVI. Much of what he
saw seemed to be the same reality that previous kings had faced. The
king was still considered the absolute ruler of France, divinely
appointed to lead the nation. The various classes and estates in France
remained quite stable; the distinctions among the nobility, the clergy,
and the rest of the French people were still largely respected. The
commoners enjoyed the relative prosperity that Louis himself had
inherited from his grandfather.
Yes, there were financial problems, but the great Louis XIV himself
had faced such crises, and they had passed. Versailles was still the
glittering jewel of Europe, the center of everything civilized. Louis’s
beloved queen, Marie Antoinette, hosted the most spectacular parties,
which were the envy of all European aristocrats. Louis himself did not

[PAGE 584]
care for such amusements, but he had his hunting parties and his other
rather pedestrian hobbies that obsessed him.
Life at the palace was rather sweet and relatively tranquil. Most
important to Louis, the glory and the majesty of France, as embodied
in its ceremonies and visual symbols, still carried the same weight as
before. Who could help but be impressed by the splendors of Versailles
itself, or by the rituals of the Catholic Church? He was the ruler of a
great nation, and there was no reason to believe that the monarchy
would not continue for as many centuries as it had already lasted.
Below the surface of what he saw, however, there were some
troubling signs of discontent. Beginning during the reign of Louis XV,
writers such as Voltaire and Diderot began to ridicule the church and
the monarchy for all of their backward, superstitious beliefs. They
reflected a new scientific spirit spreading throughout Europe, and it
was hard to reconcile this with many of the practices of the church and
the nobility. Their ideas became known as the Enlightenment, and they
began to gain influence among the expanding middle class, which had
felt excluded from power and was not so immersed in all of the
symbolism of the monarchy.
Below the seemingly tranquil façade of the nobility, there were quite
a few cracks. Many aristocrats had come to loathe the absolute power
of the king, whom they saw as weak and not worthy of their respect.
They hungered for more power for themselves.
Secret societies were sprouting up everywhere, promoting a whole
new way of socializing, far from the stuffy environment of the court.
Supreme among them were the Freemasons and their lodges, with
their own secret rituals. Danton himself was a member. The
Freemasons’ lodges were hotbeds of discontent with the monarchy,
their members highly sympathetic to the ideas of the Enlightenment.
They craved a new order in France. In Paris, the theater had suddenly
become the most popular place to frequent and to be seen at, much
more popular than the church. And plays were now being performed
that mocked the monarchy in the most brazen manner.
And all of those majestic symbols and ceremonies of the monarchy
that had remained relatively unchanged were beginning to seem rather
empty, masks with nothing behind them. Courtiers no longer really
understood what they were doing, or why, when they engaged in their
elaborate rituals in company with the king. The paintings, statues, and

[PAGE 585]
fountains ornamented with mythological figures were as beautiful as
ever, but they were simply seen as surface pieces of art, not as
indications of a deep connection to France’s glorious past.
All of these signs were subtle and disparate. It was hard to connect
them all to any kind of trend, let alone a revolution. They could pass as
novelties, new pastimes for a bored nation, without any underlying
meaning. But then came the worsening crisis in the late 1780s, and
suddenly these separate examples of disenchantment began to
combine into an undeniable force. The price of bread had risen, as well
as the cost of living, for all French subjects. As the discontent spread,
the nobility and the bourgeoisie smelled weakness in the king and
demanded more power.
Now the king could not ignore what was happening, and at the
Estates General the loss of respect and the disenchantment were all too
visible to him in the behavior of the Third Estate. Louis, however,
could only view these events through the lens of the divine monarchy
that he had inherited and clung to so desperately. These French
subjects who were disrespecting and disobeying his absolute rule must
be godless individuals, and only a noisy minority. To disobey his word
was tantamount to sacrilege.
If such people could not be persuaded by the symbols of the
glorious past, he would have to use force to make the past and the
traditions prevail. But once something has lost its spell and no longer
enchants, no amount of force can bring it back to life. And as he rode
in that carriage in October of 1789 that carried him away forever from
Versailles and the past, all he could see were people who were not his
subjects but aliens of some sort. He had to include Danton in such a
group. At his execution, he addressed the crowd as if he were still the
king, forgiving them their sins. The crowd instead saw just a human,
stripped of all his previous glory, no better than they were.
When Georges-Jacques Danton looked out at the same world as the
king, he saw something quite different. Unlike the king, he was not
timid or insecure but the opposite. He had no inner need to rely upon
the past to prop him up. He had been educated by liberal priests who
had instilled in him Enlightenment ideas. And at the age of fifteen, at
the coronation he caught a fleeting glimpse of the future, intuiting for a
moment how empty the monarchy and its symbols had become, and
that the king was just an ordinary man.

[PAGE 586]
In the 1780s he began to pick up the disparate signs of change—
from within the King’s Council and the growing disrespect among the
lawyer class, to the clubs and street life, where a new spirit could be
detected. He could feel the pain of the lower classes and empathize
with their sense of exclusion. And this new spirit was not simply
political but also cultural. The youth of Danton’s generation had grown
tired of all of the empty formality in French culture. They yearned for
something freer and more spontaneous. They wanted to express their
emotions openly and naturally. They wanted to get rid of all the
elaborate outfits and hairstyles and wear looser clothing with less
ostentation. They wanted more open socializing, the open mingling of
all the classes, as occurred in the clubs in Paris.
We could call this cultural movement the first real explosion of
Romanticism, valuing emotions and sensations above the intellect and
formalities. Danton both exemplified this Romantic spirit and
understood it. He was a man who always wore his heart on his sleeve
and whose speeches had the feel of spontaneous outpourings of ideas
and emotions. His disinterment of his wife was like something out of
Romantic literature, an expression of emotion unimaginable some ten
years before. This side of Danton was what made him so relatable and
compelling to the public.
In a way that made him quite unique, Danton was able before
anyone else to connect the meaning behind all of these signs and
foresee a mass revolution on its way. An avid swimmer, he compared
all of this to the tide in a river. Nothing in human life is ever static.
There is always discontent below the surface, and hunger for change.
Sometimes this is rather subtle, and the river seems somewhat placid
but still moving. At other times it is like a rush, a rising tide that no
one, not even a king with absolute power, can hold back.
Where was this tide carrying the French? That was the key question.
To Danton it soon became clear it was heading toward the formation of
a republic. The monarchy was now just a façade. Its show of majesty no
longer stirred the masses. They now saw that the actions of the king
were all about holding on to power; they saw the aristocracy as a bunch
of thieves, doing little work and sucking up the wealth of France. With
such levels of disenchantment, there could be no turning back, no
middle ground, no constitutional monarchy.

[PAGE 587]
As part of his unusual perspicacity and sensitivity to the spirit of the
times, before any of the other revolutionary leaders, Danton
understood that the Terror he had unleashed was a mistake and that it
was time to stop it. In this one instance, his sense of timing was off, as
he moved on this intuition at least several months in advance of the
public, giving his enemies and rivals an opening to get rid of him.
Understand: You might see King Louis XVI as an extreme
example of someone out of tune with the times, not particularly
relevant to your own life, but in fact he is much closer to you than you
think. Like him, you are probably looking at the present through the
lens of the past. When you look at the world around you, it seems
pretty much as it appeared a day or a week or a month or even a year
ago. People act more or less the same. The institutions that hold power
remain in place and are not going anywhere. People’s ways of thinking
have not really changed; the conventions that govern behavior in your
field are still followed religiously. Yes, there might be some new styles
and trends in culture, but they are not critical factors or signs of deep
change. Lulled by these appearances, it seems to you that life simply
goes on as it always has.
Below the surface, however, the tide is moving; nothing in human
culture stands still. Those who are younger than you no longer have
the same level of respect for certain values or institutions that you
have. Power dynamics—among classes, regions, industries—are in a
state of flux. People are beginning to socialize and interact in new
ways. New symbols and myths are being formed, and old ones are
fading. All of these things can seem rather disconnected until there is
some crisis or clash and people must confront what was once
seemingly invisible or separate, in the form of some sort of revolution
or cry for change.
When this occurs, some people will feel, like the king, profoundly
uncomfortable and will hold on even more fervently to the past. They
will band together to try to stop the tide from advancing, a futile task.
Leaders will feel threatened and cling more tightly to their
conventional ideas. Others will be carried along without really
understanding where it is all headed or why things are changing.
What you want and need is the power that Danton possessed to
make sense of it all and act accordingly. And this power is a function of
vision, of looking at events from a different angle, through a fresh

[PAGE 588]
framework. You ignore the clichéd interpretations that others will
inevitably spout when facing changes. You drop the mental habits and
past ways of looking at things that can cloud your vision. You stop the
tendency to moralize, to judge what is happening. You simply want to
see things as they are. You look for the undercurrents of discontent
and disharmony with the status quo, which are always there below the
surface. You see commonalities and connections among all these signs.
Slowly the flow, the tide itself, comes into focus, indicating a course, a
direction that is hidden to so many others.
Do not think of this as some intellectual exercise. Intellectuals are
often the last to really discern the spirit of the times, because they are
so grounded in theories and conventional frameworks. First and
foremost, you must be able to feel the change in the collective mood, to
sense how people are diverging from the past. Once you feel the spirit,
you can begin to analyze what is behind it. Why are people dissatisfied,
and what are they really craving? Why are they gravitating toward
these new styles? Look at those idols from the past that no longer cast
a spell, that seem ridiculous, that are the subject of mockery,
particularly among the young. They are like Louis’s carriage. When you
detect enough such disenchantment, you can be sure something strong
is cresting.
Once you have an adequate feel for what is really going on, you
must be bold in how you respond, giving voice to what other people are
feeling but not understanding. Be careful to not get too far out ahead
and be misunderstood. Ever alert, always letting go of your prior
interpretations, you can seize the opportunities in the moment that
others cannot even begin to detect. Think of yourself as an enemy of
the status quo, whose proponents must view you in turn as dangerous.
See this task as absolutely necessary for the revitalization of the human
spirit and the culture at large, and master it.
Our era is a birth-time, and a period of transition. The spirit of man has
broken with the old order of things . . . and with the old ways of thinking,
and is of the mind to let them all sink into the depths of the past and to set
about its own transformation. . . . The frivolity and boredom which unsettle
the established order, the vague foreboding of something unknown, these
are the heralds of approaching change.
—G. W. F. Hegel
Keys to Human Nature

[PAGE 589]
In human culture, we can see a phenomenon—changes in fashions and
styles—that at first glance might appear trivial, but that in fact is quite
profound, revealing a deep and fascinating part of human nature. Look
at clothing styles, for instance. In the stores or in fashion shows we can
perhaps detect some trends and changes from a few months before,
but they are usually subtle. Go back to styles ten years ago and,
compared with the present, the differences are quite apparent. Go back
twenty years and it is even clearer. With such a distance in time, we
can even notice a particular style of twenty years ago that now
probably looks a bit amusing and passé.
These changes in fashion styles that are so detectable in increments
of decades can be characterized as creating something looser and more
romantic than the previous style, or more overtly sexual and body
conscious, or more classic and elegant, or gaudier and with more frills.
We could name several other categories of changes in style, but in the
end they are limited in number, and they seem to come in waves or
patterns that are detectable over the course of several decades or
centuries. For example, the interest in sparser and more classic
clothing will recur at various intervals of time, not at precisely the
same intervals, but with a degree of regularity.
This phenomenon raises some interesting questions: Do these shifts
relate to something more than just the desire for what is new and
different? Do they reflect deeper changes in people’s psychology and
moods? And how do these changes occur, so that over enough time we
can detect them? Do they come from a top-down dynamic in which
certain individuals and tastemakers initiate a change, which is then
slowly picked up by the masses and spread virally? Or are these
tastemakers themselves responding to signs of change from within the
society as a whole, from that social force described in chapter 14,
giving it a bottom-up dynamic?
We can ask these questions about styles in music or any other
cultural form. But we can also ask them about changing styles in
thinking and theorizing, in how arguments in books are constructed.
Fifty years ago, many arguments were rooted in psychoanalysis and
sociology, writers often seeing the environment as the primary
influence on human behavior. The style was loose, literary, and given
to much speculation.

[PAGE 590]
Now arguments tend to revolve around genetics and the human
brain, with everything having to be backed up by studies and statistics.
The mere appearance of numbers on a page can lend a certain air of
credibility to the argument. Speculation is frowned upon. Sentences
are shorter, designed to communicate information. But this change in
theorizing style is not anything new. We can notice a similar back-and-
forth—from the literary and speculative to the sober and data driven—
beginning in the eighteenth century and up to the present.
What is fascinating in these shifts in style is the limited range of
changes, their recurrence, and the increasing speed we now see in the
shifts, as if we are witnessing a quickening in human restlessness and
nervous energy. And if we examine this phenomenon closely enough,
we can see quite clearly that these seemingly superficial changes do in
fact reflect deeper alterations in people’s mood and values, emerging
from the bottom up. Something as simple as a desire for looser styles
of clothing, as happened in the 1780s, reflects an overall psychological
shift. Nothing is innocent in this realm. An interest in brighter colors,
or a harder sound in music, have something else to say about what is
stirring in the collective minds of the people of that time.
And in examining this phenomenon even more deeply, we can also
make the following discovery: what drives these changes is the
continual succession of new generations of young people, who are
trying to create something more relevant to their experience of the
world, something that reflects more their values and spirit and that
goes in a different direction from that of the previous generation. (We
can generally describe a generation as comprising around twenty-two
years, with those born at the earliest and latest parts of that period
often identifying more with the previous or succeeding generation.)
And this pattern of change from one generation to the next is itself
part of a larger pattern in history, going back thousands of years, in
which particular reactions and shifts in values recur rather regularly,
all of which suggests something about human nature that transcends
us as individuals, that has programmed us to repeat these patterns for
some reason.
Many of us intuit the truth about generations—how they tend to
have a kind of personality and how the younger generation initiates so
many changes. Some of us are in denial about the phenomenon
because we like to imagine that we as individuals shape what we think

[PAGE 591]
and believe, or that other forces such as class, gender, and race play a
greater role. Certainly the study of generations can be imprecise; it is a
subtle and elusive subject. And other factors play a role as well. But
looking in depth at the phenomenon reveals that in fact it is more of an
influence than we generally imagine, and is in many ways the great
generator of so much that happens in history.
And understanding this generational phenomenon can yield several
other benefits: We can see what forces shaped our parents’ mind-set,
and then ours in turn, as we have tried to go in a different direction.
We can make better sense of the underlying changes going on in all
areas of society and begin to surmise where the world is headed, to
anticipate future trends, and to understand the role we can play in
shaping events. This can not only bring us great social power but can
also have a therapeutic, calming effect on us as we view events in the
world with some distance and equanimity, elevated above the chaotic
changes of the moment.
We shall call this knowledge generational awareness. To attain it,
first we must understand the actual profound effect that our
generation has on how we view the world, and second we must
understand the larger generational patterns that shape history and
recognize where our time period fits into the overall scheme.
The Generational Phenomenon
In our first years of life we are sponges, absorbing deeply the energy,
style, and ideas of our parents and teachers. We learn language, certain
essential values, ways of thinking, and how to function among people.
We are slowly inculcated with the culture of the time. Our minds are
supremely open at this moment, and because of this our experiences
are more intense and bound with strong emotions. As we become a few
years older, we become aware of our peers, those more or less of the
same age, going through the same process of assimilating this strange
new world we were cast into at birth.
Although we are encountering the same reality as everyone else
alive at the time, we are doing so from a peculiar angle—that of being a
child, physically smaller, more helpless, and dependent on adults.
From this point of view, the world of the adults can seem rather alien,
as we do not understand so well what motivates them, or their adult

[PAGE 592]
cares or concerns. What our parents might take as serious we can often
see as comical or odd. We may watch the same forms of entertainment
as they do, but we see them from the angle of a child, with little life
experience. We don’t have the power yet to affect this world, but we
start to interpret it in our own way, and we share this with our peers.
Then, when we reach our teen years or perhaps earlier, we become
aware that we are part of a generation of young people (focusing more
on those around our age) with whom we can identify. We bond over
our particular way of seeing things and the similar sense of humor we
have developed; we also tend to form common ideals about success
and coolness, among other values. In these years, we inevitably go
through a period of rebellion, struggling to find our own identity,
separate from our parents. This makes us deeply attuned to
appearances—to styles and fashions. We want to show that we belong
to our generational tribe, with its own look and manner.
Often a decisive event or trend will occur during these youthful
years—this could be a major war, a political scandal, a financial crisis
or economic boom. It could also be the invention of some new form of
technology that has a profound impact on social relations. Because we
are so young and impressionable, such events have a decisive influence
on the generational personality that is forming, making us cautious (if
it is a war or crash in the economy) or hungry for adventure (if it is
something that sparks prosperity or stability). Naturally, we view such
decisive events very differently from our parents and are affected more
deeply.
As we become more aware of what is going on in the world, we often
come to see the ideas and values of our parents as not fitting very well
our own experience of reality. What they have told or taught us does
not seem so relevant, and we hunger for ideas that are more related to
our youthful experience.
In this first phase of life, we shape a generational perspective. It is a
kind of collective mind-set, as we absorb the prevailing culture at the
same time as our peers, from the point of view of childhood and youth.
And because we are too young to understand or analyze this
perspective, we are generally ignorant of its formation and how it
influences what we see and how we interpret events.
Then, when we reach our twenties and into our thirties, we enter a
new phase of life and experience a shift. Now we are in a position to

[PAGE 593]
assume some power, to actually alter this world according to our own
values and ideals. As we progress in our work, we begin to influence
the culture and its politics. We inevitably clash with the older
generation that has held power for some time, as they insist on their
own way of acting and evaluating events. Many of them often view us
as immature, unsophisticated, soft, undisciplined, pampered,
unenlightened, and certainly not ready to assume power.
In some periods, the youth culture that is generated is so strong that
it comes to dominate the culture at large—in the 1920s and the 1960s,
for instance. In other periods, the older generation in positions of
leadership is much more dominant, and the influence of the emerging
adults in their twenties is less noticeable. In any event, to a greater or
lesser degree, a struggle and clash occurs between these two
generations and their perspectives.
Then, as we enter our forties and midlife and assume many of the
leadership positions in society, we begin to take notice of a younger
generation that is fighting for its own power and position. Its members
are now judging us and finding our own style and ideas rather
irrelevant. We begin to judge them in return, describing them as
immature, unsophisticated, soft, et cetera. We might begin to entertain
the notion that the world is heading downhill fast, the values we found
so important no longer mattering to this youthful set.
When we judge in this way, we are not aware that we are reacting
according to a pattern that has existed for at least three thousand
years. (There is an inscription on a Babylonian clay tablet that dates
from around 1000 BC that reads, “Today’s youth is rotten, evil, godless
and lazy. It will never be what youth used to be, and it will never be
able to preserve our culture.” We find similar complaints in all cultures
and in all time periods.) We think we are judging the younger
generation in an objective manner, but we are merely succumbing to
an illusion of perspective. It is also true that we are probably
experiencing some hidden envy of their youth and mourning the loss of
our own.
When it comes to the changes generated by the tensions between
two generations, we can say that the greater part of them will come
from the young. They are more restless, in search of their own identity,
and more attuned to the group and how they fit in. By the time such a
younger generation emerges into their thirties and forties, they will

[PAGE 594]
have shaped the world with their changes and given it a look and feel
that is distinct from their parents.
When looking at any generation, we naturally see variations within
it. We find individuals who are more aggressive than others—they tend
to be leaders, the ones who sense the styles and trends of the time and
express them first. They have less fear about breaking with the past
and defying the older generation. Danton exemplifies this type. We
also find a much larger group of followers who are not so aggressive,
who find it more exciting to keep up with trends, helping to shape and
promote them. And finally, we also find the rebels, those types who
defy their own generation and define themselves by going against the
grain. This could include the beatniks of the 1950s or those young
people in the 1960s who gravitated toward conservative politics.
We can say of these rebel types that they are just as marked by their
generation as anyone, but in reverse. And in fact, much of the same
spirit of the generation can be detected underneath this reverse version
—for instance, those younger people in the 1780s who rallied around
the aristocracy and in defense of the monarchy often felt a very
romanticized love of the old order; the young conservatives of the
1960s were just as preachy, fanatic, and idealistic in their reverse
values as the majority. The generational mind-set inevitably dominates
everyone from within, no matter how they personally try to react
against it. We cannot step outside the historical moment that we are
born into.
In considering this mind-set, we must try to think in terms of a
collective personality, or what we shall call spirit. Our generation has
inherited from our parents and the past certain key values and ways of
looking at the world that remain unquestioned. But at any moment,
people of a new generation are searching for something more alive and
relevant, something that expresses what is different, what is altering in
the present. This sense of what is moving and evolving in the present,
as opposed to what is inherited from the past, is the collective spirit
itself, its restless and searching nature. It is not something we can
easily put into words. It is more a mood, an emotional tone, a way that
people relate to one another.
That is why we can often best associate the generational spirit with
its dominant musical style, or an artistic trend for a certain type of
imagery, or a mood captured in the literature or films of that

[PAGE 595]
generation. For instance, nothing better captures the wild spirit and
frenetic pace of the 1920s than the jazz of the period and the brassy
sound of the saxophone, which was the new rage.
This spirit will tend to alter as our generation passes through the
various phases of life. How we collectively relate to the world will not
be the same in our fifties as it was in our twenties. Circumstances,
historical events, and the aging process will modify this spirit. But, as
with any individual, there is something in the generational personality
that remains intact and transcends the passing years.
The famous lost generation of the 1920s, with its flappers and wild
jazz, had certain noticeable obsessions and traits during this decade—
wild parties, alcohol, sex, money, and success, as well as a hard-boiled,
cynical attitude toward life. As it aged, its members tended to drop the
pursuit of some of these pleasures and manias, but in their later years,
they remained rather tough, cynical, materialistic, and brazen in
expressing their opinions. The baby boomers who came of age in the
1960s displayed an intense idealism and a propensity to judge and
moralize. They tend to retain such qualities, but their ideals and what
they moralize about have shifted.
If our generation has a particular spirit to it, we could say the same
for the time period that we are living through, which generally
comprises four generations alive at the same time. The blending of
these generations, the tension among them, and the clashing that often
occurs create what we shall call the overall spirit of the times or what is
commonly known as the zeitgeist. For instance, when it comes to the
1960s, we cannot separate the mood of the powerful youth culture of
that period from the antagonism and dismay it stirred among those
who were older. The dynamic and spirit of those times came from the
dramatic interaction of two clashing perspectives.
To see this in your own experience, look back at periods in the past
in which you were alive and conscious, at least some twenty years ago,
if you are old enough. With some distance, you can reflect upon how
different those times felt, what was in the air, how people interacted,
the degree of tension. The spirit of that period is not only in the styles
and clothes that are different from those of the present, but also in
something social and collective, an overall mood or feeling in the air.
Even the differences in fashions and architecture, the colors that

[PAGE 596]
became popular, the look of the cars speaks of a spirit behind them
that is animating these changes and choices.
That spirit can be characterized as wild and open, with people
hungry for all kinds of social interaction; or it can be rather tight and
cautious, with people prone to conforming and being hypercorrect; it
can be cynical or hopeful, stale or creative. What you want to do is to
be able to gauge the spirit of the present moment, with a similar sense
of distance, and to see where your generation fits into the overall
scheme of history, giving you a sense of where things might be headed.
Generational Patterns
Since the beginning of recorded time, certain writers and thinkers have
intuited a pattern to human history. It was perhaps the great
fourteenth-century Islamic scholar Ibn Khaldun who first formulated
this idea into the theory that history seems to move in four acts,
corresponding to four generations.
The first generation is that of the revolutionaries who make a
radical break with the past, establishing new values but also creating
some chaos in the struggle to do so. Often in this generation there are
some great leaders or prophets who influence the direction of the
revolution and leave their stamp on it. Then along comes a second
generation that craves some order. They are still feeling the heat of the
revolution itself, having lived through it at a very early age, but they
want to stabilize the world, establish some conventions and dogma.
Those of the third generation—having little direct connection to the
founders of the revolution—feel less passionate about it. They are
pragmatists. They want to solve problems and make life as comfortable
as possible. They are not so interested in ideas but rather in building
things. In the process, they tend to drain out the spirit of the original
revolution. Material concerns predominate, and people can become
quite individualistic.
Along comes the fourth generation, which feels that society has lost
its vitality, but they are not sure what should replace it. They begin to
question the values they have inherited, some becoming quite cynical.
Nobody knows what to believe in anymore. A crisis of sorts emerges.
Then comes the revolutionary generation, which, unified around some
new belief, finally tears down the old order, and the cycle continues.

[PAGE 597]
This revolution can be extreme and violent, or it can be less intense,
with simply the emergence of new and different values.
Although this pattern certainly has variations and is not a science,
we tend to see a lot of the overall sequencing in history. Most notable
of all is the emergence of the fourth generation and the crisis in values
that comes with it. This period is often the most painful to live through
—we humans feel a deep need to believe in something, and when we
begin to doubt and question the old order and sense a vacuum in our
values, we can go a little mad. We tend to latch onto the latest belief
systems peddled by the charlatans and demagogues who thrive in such
periods. We look for scapegoats for all the problems that now arise and
the spreading dissatisfaction. Without a unifying belief to anchor and
calm us, we become tribal, relying on some small affinity group to give
us a feeling of belonging.
Often, in a crisis period, we will notice the forming of a subgroup
among those who feel particularly anxious and resentful at the
breakdown of order. They are often people who felt somewhat
privileged in the past, and the chaos and coming change threatens
what they have taken for granted. They want to hold on to the past,
return to some golden age they can vaguely remember, and prevent
any coming revolution. They are doomed, because the cycle cannot be
stopped, and the past cannot be magically brought back to life. But as
this crisis period fades and begins to merge into the revolutionary
period, we often detect rising levels of excitement, as those who are
young and particularly hungry for something new can sense the
changes coming that they have set up in their own way.
It seems that we are living through such a crisis period, with a
generation that is experiencing it in its key phase in life. Although we
cannot see how close we might be to the end of this period, such times
never last too long, because the human spirit will not tolerate them.
Some unifying belief system is in gestation, and some new values are
being generated that we cannot yet see.
At the core of this pattern is a continual back-and-forth rhythm that
comes from emerging generations reacting against the imbalances and
mistakes of the previous generation. If we go back four generations in
our own time we can clearly see this. We start with the silent
generation. As children experiencing the Great Depression and as
adults coming of age during World War II and the postwar period, they

[PAGE 598]
became rather cautious and conservative, valuing stability, material
comforts, and fitting tightly into the group. The next generation, the
baby boomers, found the conformity of their parents rather stifling.
Emerging in the 1960s, and not haunted by the harsh financial realities
of their parents, this generation valued personal expression, having
adventures, and being idealistic.
This was followed by Generation X, which was marked by the chaos
of the 1960s and the ensuing social and political scandals. Coming of
age in the 1980s and 1990s, it was pragmatic and confrontational,
valuing individualism and self-reliance. This generation reacted
against the hypocrisies and impracticalities in their parents’ idealism.
This was followed by the millennial generation. Traumatized by
terrorism and a financial crisis, they reacted against the individualism
of the last generation, craving security and teamwork, with a noted
dislike of conflict and confrontation.
We can deduce two important lessons from this: First, our values
will often depend upon where we fall in this pattern and how our
generation reacts against the particular imbalances of the previous
generation. We would simply not be the same person we are now, with
the same attitude and ideals, if we had emerged during the 1920s or
the 1950s instead of later periods. We are not aware of this critical
influence because it is too close to us to observe. Certainly we bring our
own individual spirit into play in this drama, and to the degree that we
can cultivate our uniqueness, we will gain power and the ability to
direct the zeitgeist. But it is critical that we recognize first the
dominant role that our generation plays in our formation, and where
this generation falls in the pattern.
Second, we notice that generations seem capable only of reacting
and moving in an opposing direction to the previous generation.
Perhaps this is because a generational perspective is formed in youth,
when we are more insecure and prone to thinking in black-and-white
terms. A middle way, a balanced form of choosing what might be good
or bad in the values and trends of the previous generation, seems
contrary to our collective nature.
On the other hand, this back-and-forth pattern has a salutary effect.
If one generation simply carried forward the tendencies of the previous
one, we would probably have destroyed ourselves long ago. Imagine
generations that succeeded the wildness of the 1920s or the 1960s by

[PAGE 599]
continuing with this spirit, and going further with it; or a generation
that succeeded the 1950s by remaining equally conservative and
conformist. We would suffocate ourselves with too much self-
expression or stagnation. The pattern may lead to imbalances, but it
also ensures that we revitalize ourselves.
Sometimes the changes that are generated in a revolutionary period
are rather trivial and do not last past the cycle. But sometimes, from a
strong crisis, a revolution forges something new that lasts for centuries
and represents progress toward values that are more rational and
empathetic. In seeing this historical pattern, we must recognize what
seems to be an overall human spirit that transcends any particular
time and that keeps us evolving. If for any reason the cycle stopped, we
would be doomed.
—
Your task as a student of human nature is threefold: First and
foremost, you must alter your attitude toward your own generation.
We like to imagine that we are autonomous and that our values and
ideas come from within, not without, but this is in fact not the case.
Your goal is to understand as deeply as possible how profoundly the
spirit of your generation, and the times that you live in, have
influenced how you perceive the world.
We are usually hypersensitive when it comes to our own generation.
The perspective was formed in our childhood, when we were most
vulnerable, and our emotional bond to our peers was established early
on. We often hear an older or younger generation criticizing us, and we
naturally become defensive. When it comes to the flaws or imbalances
in our generation, our tendency is to see them as virtues. For instance,
if we grew up in a generation that was more fearful and cautious, we
might shy away from major responsibilities, such as owning a house or
a car. We will interpret this as a desire for freedom or a desire to help
the environment, unwilling to confront the fears that are really
underneath it all.
We cannot understand our generation in the same way that we
understand a scientific fact, such as the characteristics of an organism.
It is something alive within us, and our understanding of it is tainted
by our own emotions and biases. What you must do is to try to attack

[PAGE 600]
the problem free from judgments and moralizing, and to become as
objective as humanly possible. The personality of your generation is
neither positive nor negative; it is simply an outgrowth of the organic
process described above.
Consider yourself a kind of archaeologist digging into your own past
and that of your generation, looking for artifacts, for observations that
you can piece together to form a picture of the underlying spirit. When
you examine your memories, try to do so with some distance, even
when you recall the emotions you felt at the time. Catch yourself in the
inevitable process of making judgments of good and bad about your
generation or the next one, and let go of them. You can develop such a
skill through practice. Forging such an attitude will play a key role in
your development. With some distance and awareness, you can
become much more than a follower of or a rebel against your
generation; you can mold your own relationship to the zeitgeist and
become a formidable trendsetter.
Your second task is to create a kind of personality profile of your
generation, so that you can understand its spirit in the present and
exploit it. Keep in mind that there are always nuances and exceptions.
What you are looking for is common traits that signal an overall spirit.
You can begin this by looking at the decisive events that occurred in
the years before you entered the work world and that played a large
role in shaping this personality. If this period comprises more or less
twenty-two years, there is often more than just one decisive event for
that period. For instance, for those who came of age during the 1930s,
there was the Depression and then the advent of World War II. For the
baby boomers, there was the Vietnam War, and later Watergate and
the political scandals of the early 1970s.
Generation X were children during the sexual revolution and
adolescents in the era of latchkey kids. For millennials there was 9/11
and then the financial meltdown of 2008. Depending on where you
fall, both will influence you, but one more than the other, as it occurs
closer to those formative years between ten and eighteen, when you
were gaining awareness of the wider world and developing core values.
Some times, such as the 1950s, can be periods of relative stability
bordering on stagnation. This will have a powerful effect as well,
considering the restlessness of the human mind, particularly among
the young, who will come to yearn for adventure and to stir things up.

[PAGE 601]
You must also factor into this equation any major technological
advances or inventions that alter how people interact.
Try to map out the ramifications of these decisive events. Pay
particular attention to the effect they may have had on the pattern of
socialization that will characterize your generation. If the event was a
major crisis of some sort, that will tend to make those of your
generation band together for comfort and security, valuing the team
and feelings of love, and allergic to confrontation. A period of stability
and nonevents will make you gravitate toward others for adventure, for
group experimentation, sometimes bordering on the reckless. In
general, you will tend to notice a socializing style of your peers, most
evident in your twenties. Search for the roots of this.
These larger events will have an effect on how you view success and
money and whether you value status and wealth or less material values
such as creativity and personal expression. How those of your
generation view failure in a venture or career will be quite telling—is it
a badge of shame or considered part of the entrepreneurial process,
even a positive experience? You can gauge this as well by those years
when you entered the work world—did you feel the pressure to start
making money right away, or was it a time to explore the world and
have adventures, then settle on something in your thirties?
In filling out this profile, look at the parenting styles of those who
raised you—permissive, overcontrolling, neglectful, or empathetic. The
famously permissive style of those who raised children in the 1890s
helped create the wild, carefree attitude of the lost generation of the
1920s. Those parents who were deeply affected by the 1960s often
ended up being quite self-absorbed and somewhat neglectful toward
their children, who could not help but feel a bit alienated and even
angry because of this. Parents who are overprotective will shape a
generation that fears going outside its comfort zones. These parenting
styles come in waves. The children who were overprotected do not
generally become helicopter parents. Your own parents might have
been an exception to the prevailing style, but you will notice a
personality stamp on your peers that will become very evident in the
teen years and early twenties.
Pay close attention to the heroes and icons of a generation, those
who act out the qualities that others secretly wish they had as well.
They are often the types who gain celebrity in youth culture—the

[PAGE 602]
rebels, the successful entrepreneurs, the gurus, the activists. These
indicate emerging new values. Similarly, look at the trends and fads
that suddenly sweep through your generation, for instance the sudden
popularity of digital currencies. Do not take these trends at face value,
but look for the underlying spirit, the unconscious attraction toward
certain values or ideals that they reveal. Nothing is too trivial for this
analysis.
Like an individual, any generation will tend to have an unconscious,
shadow side to its personality. A good sign of this can be found in the
particular style of humor that each generation tends to forge. In humor
people release their frustrations and express their inhibitions. Such
humor could tend toward the irrational, or something edgier and even
aggressive. A generation might seem rather prudish and correct, but its
humor is raunchy and irreverent. This is the shadow side leaking out.
As part of this, you will want to look at the relationship of the
genders in your generation. In the 1920s and 1930s, men and women
were trying to bridge their differences, to socialize in mixed groups as
much as possible. The male icons were often quite feminine, such as
Rudolph Valentino; and the female icons had a pronounced masculine
or androgynous edge, such as Marlene Dietrich and Josephine Baker.
Contrast this with the 1950s and the sudden and rather strong split
between the genders, revealing an unconscious discomfort with and
split from the cross-gender tendencies we all feel (see chapter 12).
In looking at this shadow side of your generation, keep in mind that
its tendency toward one extreme—materialism, spirituality, adventure,
safety—conceals a hidden attraction to the opposite. A generation like
the one that came of age in the 1960s seemed disinterested in material
things. Its main values were spiritual and inward, being spontaneous
and what was thought of as authentic, all of this in reaction to their
materialistic parents. But underneath this spirit, we could detect a
secret attraction to the material side of life, in the desire to always have
the best of something—the latest sound systems, the highest-quality
drugs, the hippest clothes. This attraction was revealed in all its truth
during the yuppie years of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
With all of this accumulated knowledge you can begin to form an
overall profile of your generation, one that is as complex and organic
as the phenomenon itself.

[PAGE 603]
Your third task, then, is to expand this knowledge to something
broader, first trying to piece together what could be considered the
zeitgeist. In this sense, you are looking particularly at the relationship
between the two dominant generations, early adults (ages twenty-two
to forty-four) and those in midlife (forty-five to sixty-six). No matter
how close the parents and children of these generations might seem,
there is always an underlying tension, along with some resentment and
envy. There are natural differences between their values and how they
look at the world. You want to examine this tension and determine
which generation tends to dominate and how this power dynamic
might be shifting in the present. You will also want to see which part of
the larger historical pattern your generation might fit into.
This overall awareness will yield several important benefits. For
instance, your generational perspective tends to create a particular
kind of myopia. Each generation tends toward some imbalance as it
reacts against the previous one. It views and judges everything
according to certain values that it holds over others and this closes the
mind to other possibilities. We can be both idealistic and pragmatic,
value teamwork and our own individual spirit, et cetera. There is much
to be gained by looking at the world from the perspective of your
parents or your children, and even adopting some of their values.
Feeling that your generation is superior is simply an illusion. Your
awareness will free you from these mental blocks and illusions, making
your mind more fluid and creative. You will be able to shape your own
values and ideas and not be such a product of the times.
With your awareness of the overall zeitgeist, you will also
understand the historical context. You will have a sense of where the
world is headed. You can anticipate what is around the corner. With
such knowledge, you can bring your own individual spirit into play and
help shape this future that is gestating in the present.
And feeling deeply connected to the unbroken chain of history, and
your role in this grand historical drama, will infuse you with a
calmness that will make everything in life more bearable. You do not
overreact at the outrage of the day. You do not go gaga over the latest
trend. You are aware of the pattern that will tend to swing things in a
different direction within a period of time. If you feel out of harmony
with the times, you know that the bad days will end and you can play
your part in making the next wave happen.

[PAGE 604]
Keep in mind that this knowledge is more critical to posses now
than ever, for two reasons. First, despite any antiglobal sentiments
sweeping the world, technology and social media have unified us in
inalterable ways. This means that people of one generation will often
have more in common with those of the same generation in other
cultures than with older generations in their own country. This
unprecedented state of affairs means that the zeitgeist is more directly
globalized than ever before, making knowledge of it that much more
essential and powerful.
And second, because of these sharp changes initiated by
technological innovations, the pace has quickened, creating a self-
fulfilling dynamic. Young people feel almost addicted to this pace and
crave more shifts, even if of a trivial nature. With the quickening pace
there are more crises, which only speeds up the process. This pace will
tend to make you get dizzy and lose your perspective. You might
imagine some trivial shift as groundbreaking and will thus ignore the
real groundbreaking change under way. You will not be able to keep
up, let alone anticipate what might come next. Only your generational
awareness, your calm historical perspective, will allow you to master
such times.
Strategies for Exploiting the Spirit of the Times
To make the most of the zeitgeist, you must begin with a simple
premise: you are a product of the times as much as anyone; the
generation you were born into has shaped your thoughts and values,
whether you are aware of this or not. And so, if you feel from deep
within some frustration with the way things are in the world or with
the older generation, or if you sense there is something that is missing
in the culture, you can be almost certain that other people of your
generation are feeling the same way. And if you are the one to act on
this feeling, your work will resonate with your generation and help
shape the zeitgeist. With this in mind, you must put into practice some
or all of the following strategies.
Push against the past. You may feel a deep need to create something
new and more relevant to your generation, but the past will almost
always exercise a strong pull on you, in the form of the values of your
parents that you internalized at a young age. Inevitably you are a bit
fearful and conflicted. And because of this, you might hesitate to go full

[PAGE 605]
throttle with whatever you do or express, and your defiance of the past
ways of doing things will tend to be rather tepid.
Instead you must force yourself in the opposite direction. Use the
past and its values or ideas as something to push against with great
force, using any anger you might feel to help in this. Make your break
with the past as sharp and clear as possible. Express what is taboo;
shatter the conventions that the older generation adheres to. All of this
will excite and attract the attention of people of your generation, many
of whom will want to follow your lead.
It was by being so audacious and defiant of the older generation
that the Earl of Essex epitomized the new, confident spirit of post-
armada England and became the darling of his generation (see