chapter 2.) There are genuine saints out there, but they do

chapter 2.) There are genuine saints out there, but they do
not feel the need to publicize their deeds or grab power. To distinguish
between the real and the fake, ignore their words and the aura they
project, focusing on their deeds and the details of their life—how much

[PAGE 277]
they seem to enjoy power and attention, the astonishing degree of
wealth they have accumulated, the number of mistresses, the level of
self-absorption. Once you recognize this type, do not become a naive
follower. Keep some distance. If they are enemies, simply shine a light
on the clear signs of hypocrisy.
As a variation on this, you will find people who propound a
philosophy of free love and anything goes; but in fact they are after
power. They prefer sex with those who are dependent on them. And of
course anything goes, as long as it’s on their terms.
The Passive-Aggressive Charmer: These types are amazingly
nice and accommodating when you first meet them, so much so that
you tend to let them into your life rather quickly. They smile a lot. They
are upbeat and always willing to help. At some point, you may return
the favor by hiring them for a job or helping them in their careers. You
will detect along the way some cracks in the veneer—perhaps they
make a somewhat critical comment out of the blue, or you hear from
friends that they have been talking about you behind your back. Then
something ugly occurs—a blowup, some act of sabotage or betrayal—so
unlike that nice, charming person you first befriended.
The truth is that these types realize early on in life that they have
aggressive, envious tendencies that are hard to control. They want
power. They intuit that such inclinations will make life hard for them.
Over many years they cultivate the opposite façade—their niceness has
an almost aggressive edge. Through this stratagem they are able to
gain social power. But they secretly resent having to play such a role
and be so deferential. They can’t maintain it. Under stress or simply
worn out by the effort, they will lash out and hurt you. They can do this
well now that they know you and your weak spots. They will, of course,
blame you for what ensues.
Your best defense is to be wary of people who are too quick to
charm and befriend, too nice and accommodating at first. Such
extreme niceness is never natural. Keep your distance and look for
some early signs, such as passive-aggressive comments. If you notice
that—somewhat out of character—they indulge in malicious gossip
about someone, you can be sure the Shadow is speaking and that you
will be the target of such gossip one day.
The Fanatic: You are impressed by their fervor, in support of
whatever cause. They speak forcefully. They allow for no compromise.

[PAGE 278]
They will clean things up, restore greatness. They radiate strength and
conviction, and because of this they gain followers. They have a flair
for drama and capturing attention. But at the key moment when they
could possibly deliver what they have promised, they unexpectedly slip
up. They become indecisive at the wrong moment, or burn themselves
out and fall ill, or take such ill-conceived actions that it all falls apart.
It’s as if they have suddenly lost belief, or secretly wanted to fail.
The truth is that such types have massive insecurities from early on
in life. They have doubts about their self-worth. They never felt loved
or admired enough. Riddled with fears and uncertainty, they cover this
up with the mask of great belief, in themselves and in their cause. You
will notice in their past some shifts in their belief system, sometimes
radical. That is because it is not the particular belief that matters but
the intense conviction, and so they will shift this around to fit the
times. Belief in something is like a drug for them. But the doubts
return. They secretly know they cannot deliver the goods. And so under
stress they become the opposite—indecisive and secretly doubtful.
They suddenly fire their assistants and managers to give the
impression of action, but unconsciously they are sabotaging
themselves with unnecessary change. They have to blow it all up,
somehow and yet blame others.
Never be taken in by the strength of people’s convictions and their
flair for drama. Always operate by the rule that the greater the
stridency in what they say, the deeper the underlying insecurities and
doubts. Do not become a follower. They will make a fool of you.
The Rigid Rationalist: All of us have irrational tendencies. It is
the lasting legacy of our primitive origins. We will never get rid of
them. We are prone to superstitions, to seeing connections between
events that have no connection. We are fascinated by coincidences. We
anthropomorphize and project our feelings onto other people and the
world around us. We secretly consult astrology charts. We must simply
accept this. In fact, we often resort to irrationality as a form of
relaxation—silly jokes, meaningless activities, occasional dabbling in
the occult. Always being rational can be tiresome. But for some people,
this makes them terribly uncomfortable. They experience this
primitive thinking as softness, as mysticism, as contrary to science and
technology. Everything must be clear and analytical in the extreme.
They become devout atheists, not realizing that the concept of God
cannot be proven or disproven. It is a belief either way.

[PAGE 279]
The repressed, however, always return. Their faith in science and
technology has a religious air to it. When it comes to an argument, they
will impose their ideas with extra intellectual heft and even a touch of
anger, which reveals the stirring of the primitive within and the hidden
emotional need to bully. At the extreme, they will indulge in a love
affair that is most irrational and contrary to their image—the professor
running off with the young model. Or they will make some bad career
choice, or fall for some ridiculous financial scheme, or indulge in some
conspiracy theory. They are also prone to strange shifts in mood and
emotional outbursts as the Shadow stirs. Bait them into just such
overreactions to prick their bubble of intellectual superiority. True
rationality should be sober and skeptical about its own powers and not
publicize itself.
The Snob: These types have a tremendous need to be different
from others, to assert some form of superiority over the mass of
mankind. They have the most refined aesthetic tastes when it comes to
art, or film criticism, or fine wines, or gourmet food, or vintage punk
rock records. They have amassed impressive knowledge of these
things. They put a lot of emphasis on appearances—they are more
“alternative” than others, their tattoos are more unique. In many cases,
they seem to come from very interesting backgrounds, perhaps with
some exciting ancestry. Everything surrounding them is extraordinary.
Of course, it later comes out that they were exaggerating or downright
lying about their background. Beau Brummell, the notorious snob and
dandy of the early nineteenth century, actually came from a staunch
middle-class background, the opposite of what he peddled. The family
of Karl Lagerfeld, the current Chanel creative director, did not inherit
its money but made it in the most bourgeois fashion, contrary to the
stories he has told.
The truth is that banality is part of human existence. Much of our
lives is spent doing the most boring and tedious tasks. For most of us,
our parents had normal, unglamorous jobs. We all have mediocre sides
to our character and skills. Snobs are especially sensitive about this,
greatly insecure about their origins and possible mediocrity. Their way
of dealing with this is to distract and deceive with appearances (as
opposed to real originality in their work), surrounding themselves with
the extraordinary and with special knowledge. Underneath it all is the
real person waiting to come out—rather ordinary and not so very
different.

[PAGE 280]
In any case, those who are truly original and different do not need
to make a great show of it. In fact, they are often embarrassed by being
so different and learn to appear more humble. (As an example of this,
see the story of Abraham Lincoln in the section below.) Be extra wary
of those who go out of their way to make a show of their difference.
The Extreme Entrepreneur: At first glance these types seem to
possess very positive qualities, especially for work. They maintain very
high standards and pay exceptional attention to detail. They are willing
to do much of the work themselves. If mixed with talent, this often
leads to success early on in life. But underneath the façade the seeds of
failure are taking root. This first appears in their inability to listen to
others. They cannot take advice. They need no one. In fact, they
mistrust others who do not have their same high standards. With
success they are forced to take on more and more responsibility.
If they were truly self-reliant, they would know the importance of
delegating on a lower level to maintain control on the higher level, but
something else is stirring within—the Shadow. Soon the situation
becomes chaotic. Others must come in and take over the business.
Their health and finances are ruined and they become completely
dependent on doctors or outside financiers. They go from complete
control to total dependence on others. (Think of the pop star Michael
Jackson near the end of his life.)
Often their outward show of self-reliance disguises a hidden desire
to have others take care of them, to regress to the dependency of
childhood. They can never admit this to themselves or show any signs
of such weakness, but unconsciously they are drawn to creating
enough chaos that they break down and are forced into some form of
dependency. There are signs beforehand: recurring health issues, the
sudden microneeds to be pampered by people in their daily lives. But
the big sign comes as they lose control and fail to take steps to halt this.
It is best to not get too entangled with such types later on in their
careers, as they have a tendency to bring about much collateral
damage.
The Integrated Human
In the course of our lives we inevitably meet people who appear to be
especially comfortable with themselves. They display certain traits that

[PAGE 281]
help give this impression: they are able to laugh at themselves; they
can admit to certain shortcomings in their character, as well as to
mistakes they have made; they have a playful, sometimes impish edge
to them, as if they have retained more of the child within; they can play
their role in life with a little bit of distance (see the last section of
chapter 3). At times they can be charmingly spontaneous.
What such people signal to us is a greater authenticity. If most of us
have lost a lot of our natural traits in becoming socialized adults, the
authentic types have somehow managed to keep them alive and active.
We can contrast them easily with the opposite type: people who are
touchy, who are hypersensitive to any perceived slight, and who give
the impression of being somewhat uncomfortable with themselves and
having something to hide. We humans are masters at smelling the
difference. We can almost feel it with people in their nonverbal
behavior—the relaxed or tense body language, the flowing or halting
tone of voice; the way the eyes gaze and let you in; the genuine smile or
lack of it.
One thing is for certain: we are completely drawn to the authentic
types and unconsciously repulsed by their opposite. The reason for this
is simple: we all secretly mourn for the child part of our character we
have lost—the wildness, the spontaneity, the intensity of experience,
the open mind. Our overall energy is diminished by the loss. Those
who emit that air of authenticity signal to us another possibility—that
of being an adult who has managed to integrate the child and the adult,
the dark and the light, the unconscious and the conscious mind. We
yearn to be around them. Perhaps some of their energy will rub off on
us.
If Richard Nixon in many ways epitomizes the inauthentic type, we
find many examples of the opposite to inspire us—in politics, men like
Winston Churchill and Abraham Lincoln; in the arts, people like
Charlie Chaplin and Josephine Baker; in science, someone like Albert
Einstein; in social life in general, someone like Jacqueline Kennedy
Onassis. And these types indicate for us the path to follow, which
largely centers on self-awareness. Conscious of our Shadow, we can
control, channel, and integrate it. Aware of what we have lost, we can
reconnect to that part of ourselves that has sunk into the Shadow.
The following are four clear and practical steps for achieving this.

[PAGE 282]
See the Shadow. This is the most difficult step in the process. The
Shadow is something we deny and repress. It is so much easier to dig
up and moralize about the dark qualities of others. It is almost
unnatural for us to look inward at this side of ourselves. But remember
that you are only half a human if you keep this buried. Be intrepid in
this process.
The best way to begin is to look for indirect signs, as indicated in the
sections above. For instance, take note of any particular one-sided,
emphatic traits in yourself. Assume that the opposite trait lies buried
deep within, and from there try to see more signs of this trait in your
behavior. Look at your own emotional outbursts and moments of
extreme touchiness. Somebody or something has struck a chord. Your
sensitivity to a remark or imputation indicates a Shadow quality that is
stirring, in the form of a deep insecurity. Bring it into the light.
Look deeply at your tendencies to project emotions and bad
qualities onto people you know, or even entire groups. For instance,
say you really loathe narcissistic types or pushy people. What is
happening is that you are probably brushing up against your own
narcissistic tendencies and secret desire to be more assertive, in the
form of a vehement denial or hatred. We are particularly sensitive to
traits and weaknesses in others that we are repressing in ourselves.
Look at moments in your youth (late teens, early twenties) in which
you acted in a rather insensitive or even cruel manner. When you were
younger, you had less control of the Shadow and it came out more
naturally, not with the repressed force of later years.
Later in his career, the writer Robert Bly (born 1926) began to feel
depressed. His writing had become sterile. He started to think more
and more about the Shadow side of his character. He was determined
to find signs of it and consciously scrutinize it. Bly was the bohemian
type of artist, very much active in the counterculture of the 1960s. His
artistic roots went back to the Romantic artists of the early nineteenth
century, men and women who extolled spontaneity and naturalness. In
much of Bly’s own writing, he railed at advertising men and
businesspeople—as he saw it, they were so calculating, planning
everything to the extreme, afraid of the chaos of life, and quite
manipulative.
And yet, as he looked inward, Bly could catch glimpses of such
calculating, manipulative qualities in himself. He too secretly feared

[PAGE 283]
moments of chaos in life, liked to plan things out and control events.
He could be quite malicious with people he perceived to be so
different, but in fact there was a part of the stockbroker and
advertising man within him. Perhaps it was the deeper part of himself.
Others told him that they saw him as rather classical in his taste and in
his writing (constructing things well), something that bothered him,
since he thought the opposite. But as he became increasingly honest
with himself, he realized they were right. (People can often see our
Shadow better than we can, and it would be wise to elicit their frank
opinions on the subject.)
Step by step he unearthed the dark qualities within—rigid, overly
moralistic, et cetera—and in doing so he felt reconnected with the
other half of his psyche. He could be honest with himself and channel
the Shadow creatively. His depression lifted, as well as the writer’s
block.
Take this process deeper by reexamining the earlier version of
yourself. Look at traits in childhood that were drummed out of you by
your parents and peers—certain weaknesses or vulnerabilities or forms
of behavior, traits you were made to feel ashamed of. Perhaps your
parents did not like your introspective tendencies or your interest in
certain subjects that were not of their taste. They instead steered you
toward careers and interests that suited them. Look at emotions you
were once prone to, things that sparked a sense of awe or excitement
that has gone missing. You have become more like others as you have
gotten older, and you must rediscover the lost authentic parts of
yourself.
Finally, look at your dreams as the most direct and clear view of
your Shadow. Only there will you find the kinds of behavior you have
carefully avoided in conscious life. The Shadow is talking to you in
various ways. Don’t look for symbols or hidden meanings. Pay
attention instead to the emotional tone and overall feelings that they
inspire, holding on to them throughout the day. This could be
unexpected bold behavior on your part, or intense anxiety spurred by
certain situations, or sensations of being physically trapped or of
soaring above it all, or exploring a place that is forbidden and beyond
the boundaries. The anxieties could relate to insecurities you are not
confronting; the soaring and exploring are hidden desires trying to rise
to consciousness. Get in the habit of writing your dreams down and
paying deep attention to their feeling tone.

[PAGE 284]
The more you go through this process and see the outlines of your
Shadow, the easier it will become. You will find more signs as your
tense muscles of repression loosen up. At a certain point, the pain of
going through this turns into excitement at what you’re uncovering.
Embrace the Shadow. Your natural reaction in uncovering and facing
up to your dark side is to feel uncomfortable and maintain only a
surface awareness of it. Your goal here must be the opposite—not only
complete acceptance of the Shadow but the desire to integrate it into
your present personality.
From an early age Abraham Lincoln liked to analyze himself, and a
recurrent theme in his self-examinations was that he had a split
personality—on the one hand an ambitious almost cruel streak to his
nature, and on the other a sensitivity and softness that made him
frequently depressed. Both sides of his nature made him feel
uncomfortable and odd. On the rough side, for instance, he loved
boxing and thoroughly thrashing his opponent in the ring. In law and
politics he had a rather scathing sense of humor.
Once he wrote some anonymous letters to a newspaper, attacking a
politician he thought of as a buffoon. The letters were so effective that
the target went mad with rage. He found out that Lincoln was the
source of them and challenged him to a duel. This became the talk of
the town and proved quite embarrassing to Lincoln. He managed to get
out of the duel, but he vowed to never indulge his cruel streak again.
He recognized the trait in himself and would not deny it. Instead he
would pour his aggressive, competitive energy into winning debates
and elections.
On his soft side, he loved poetry, felt tremendous affection for
animals, and hated witnessing any kind of physical cruelty. He hated
drinking and what it did to people. At his worst, he was prone to fits of
deep melancholy and brooding over death. All in all, he felt himself to
be far too sensitive for the rough-and-tumble world of politics. Instead
of denying this side of himself, he channeled it into incredible empathy
for the public, for the average man and woman. Caring deeply about
the loss of lives in the war, he put all his efforts into ending it early. He
did not project evil onto the South but rather empathized with its
plight and planned on a peace that was not retributive.
He also incorporated it into a healthy sense of humor about himself,
making frequent jokes about his ugliness, high-pitched voice, and

[PAGE 285]
brooding nature. By embracing and integrating such opposing qualities
into his public persona, he gave the impression of tremendous
authenticity. People could identify with him in a way never seen before
with a political leader.
Explore the Shadow. Consider the Shadow as having depths that
contain great creative energy. You want to explore these depths, which
include more primitive forms of thinking and the darkest impulses that
come out of our animal nature.
As children, our minds were much more fluid and open. We would
make the most surprising and creative associations between ideas. But
as we get older, we tend to tighten this down. We live in a
sophisticated, high-tech world dominated by statistics and ideas
gleaned from big data. Free associations between ideas, images from
dreams, hunches, and intuitions seem irrational and subjective. But
this leads to the most sterile forms of thinking. The unconscious, the
Shadow side of the mind, has powers we must learn to tap into. And in
fact some of the most creative people in our midst actively engage this
side of thinking.
Albert Einstein based one of his theories of relativity on an image
from a dream. The mathematician Jacques Hadamard made his most
important discoveries while boarding a bus or taking a shower—
hunches that came out of nowhere, or what he claimed to be his
unconscious. Louis Pasteur made his great discovery about
immunization based on a rather free association of ideas after an
accident in his laboratory. Steve Jobs claimed that his most effective
ideas came from intuitions, moments when his mind roamed most
freely.
Understand: The conscious thinking we depend on is quite
limited. We can hold on to only so much information in short- and
long-term memory. But the unconscious contains an almost limitless
amount of material from memories, experiences, and information
absorbed in study. After prolonged research or work on a problem,
when we relax our minds in dreams or while we are performing
unrelated banal activities, the unconscious begins to go to work and
associate all sorts of random ideas, some of the more interesting ones
bubbling to the surface. We all have dreams, intuitions, and free
associations of ideas, but we often refuse to pay attention to them or
take them seriously. Instead you want to develop the habit of using this

[PAGE 286]
form of thought more often by having unstructured time in which you
can play with ideas, widen the options you consider, and pay serious
attention to what comes to you in less conscious states of mind.
In a similar vein, you want to explore from within your own darkest
impulses, even those that might seem criminal, and find a way to
express them in your work or externalize them in some fashion, in a
journal for instance. We all have aggressive and antisocial desires, even
toward those we love. We also have traumas from our earliest years
that are associated with emotions we prefer to forget. The greatest art
in all media somehow expresses these depths, which causes a powerful
reaction in us all because they are so repressed. Such is the power of
the films of Ingmar Bergman or the novels of Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and
you can have the same power by externalizing your dark side.
Show the Shadow. Most of the time we secretly suffer from the endless
social codes we have to adhere to. We have to seem so nice and
agreeable, always going along with the group. We better not show too
much confidence or ambition. Seem humble and similar to everyone
else; that’s how the game is played. In following this path we gain
comfort by fitting in, but we also become defensive and secretly
resentful. Being so nice becomes a habit, which easily turns into
timidity, lack of confidence, and indecision. At the same time, our
Shadow will show itself, but unconsciously, in explosive fits and starts,
and often to our detriment.
It would be wise to look at those who are successful in their field.
Inevitably we will see that most of them are much less bound by these
codes. They are generally more assertive and overtly ambitious. They
care much less what others think of them. They flout the conventions
openly and proudly. And they are not punished but greatly rewarded.
Steve Jobs is a classic example. He showed his rough, Shadow side in
his way of working with others. Our tendency in looking at people like
Jobs is to admire their creativity and subtract their darker qualities as
unnecessary. If only he had been nicer, he would have been a saint. But
in fact the dark side was inextricably interwoven with his power and
creativity. His ability to not listen to others, to go his own way, and be
a bit rough about it were key parts of his success, which we venerate.
And so it is with many creative, powerful people. Subtract their active
Shadow, and they would be like everyone else.

[PAGE 287]
Understand: You pay a greater price for being so nice and
deferential than for consciously showing your Shadow. First, to follow
the latter path you must begin by respecting your own opinions more
and those of others less, particularly when it comes to your areas of
expertise, to the field you have immersed yourself in. Trust your native
genius and the ideas you have come up with. Second, get in the habit in
your daily life of asserting yourself more and compromising less. Do
this under control and at opportune moments. Third, start caring less
what people think of you. You will feel a tremendous sense of
liberation. Fourth, realize that at times you must offend and even hurt
people who block your path, who have ugly values, who unjustly
criticize you. Use such moments of clear injustice to bring out your
Shadow and show it proudly. Fifth, feel free to play the impudent,
willful child who mocks the stupidity and hypocrisy of others.
Finally, flout the very conventions that others follow so
scrupulously. For centuries, and still to this day, gender roles represent
the most powerful convention of all. What men and women can do or
say has been highly controlled, to the point where it seems almost to
represent biological differences instead of social conventions. Women
in particular are socialized to be extra nice and agreeable. They feel
continual pressure to adhere to this and mistake it for something
natural and biological.
Some of the most influential women in history were those who
deliberately broke with these codes—performers like Marlene Dietrich
and Josephine Baker, political figures such as Eleanor Roosevelt,
businesswomen such as Coco Chanel. They brought out their Shadow
and showed it by acting in ways that were traditionally thought of as
masculine, blending and confusing gender roles.
Even Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis gained great power by playing
against the type of the traditional political wife. She had a pronounced
malicious streak. When Norman Mailer first met her in 1960 and she
seemed to poke fun at him, he saw that “something droll and hard
came into her eyes as if she were a very naughty eight-year-old
indeed.” When people displeased her, she showed it rather openly. She
seemed to care little what others thought of her. And she became a
sensation because of the naturalness she exuded.
In general, consider this a form of exorcism. Once you show these
desires and impulses, they no longer lie hidden in corners of your

[PAGE 288]
personality, twisting and operating in secret ways. You have released
your demons and enhanced your presence as an authentic human. In
this way, the Shadow becomes your ally.
Unfortunately there is no doubt about the fact that man is, as a whole, less
good than he imagines himself or wants to be. Everyone carries a shadow,
and the less it is embodied in the individual’s conscious life, the blacker and
denser it is.
—Carl Jung

[PAGE 289]
10
Beware the Fragile Ego
The Law of Envy
We humans are naturally compelled to compare ourselves with
one another. We are continually measuring people’s status, the
levels of respect and attention they receive, and noticing any
differences between what we have and what they have. For some of
us, this need to compare serves as a spur to excel through our work.
For others, it can turn into deep envy—feelings of inferiority and
frustration that lead to covert attacks and sabotage. Nobody admits
to acting out of envy. You must recognize the early warning signs—
praise and bids for friendship that seem effusive and out of
proportion; subtle digs at you under the guise of good-natured
humor; apparent uneasiness with your success. It is most likely to
crop up among friends or your peers in the same profession. Learn to
deflect envy by drawing attention away from yourself. Develop your
sense of self-worth from internal standards and not incessant
comparisons.
Fatal Friends
In late 1820, Mary Shelley (1797–1851), author of the novel
Frankenstein, and her twenty-eight-year-old husband, the poet Percy
Bysshe Shelley, moved to Pisa, Italy, after having spent several years
traveling through the country. Mary had had a rough time of it lately.
Her two young children had both died from fevers while in Italy. Mary
had been particularly close to her son William, and his death had
pushed her into a profound depression. She had recently given birth to
another child, a boy named Percy, but she felt continually anxious
about his health. The guilt and gloom she felt surrounding the death of

[PAGE 290]
her children had finally caused some friction between her and her
husband. They had been so close, had experienced so much together,
that they could almost read each other’s thoughts and moods. Now her
husband was drifting away, interested in other women. She was hoping
that in Pisa they could finally settle down, reconnect, and do some
serious writing.
In early 1821, a young English couple named Jane and Edward
Williams arrived in Pisa, and their first stop in town was to visit the
Shelleys. They were close friends with one of Percy Shelley’s cousins.
They were thinking of living in Pisa, and they were clearly starstruck at
meeting the famous couple. Mary was used to these kinds of visitors;
she and her husband were so notorious that curious bohemians from
all over Europe would come to gawk at them and try to make their
acquaintance.
Certainly the Williamses, like all the other visitors, would have
known about the Shelleys’ past. They would have known that Mary had
two of the most illustrious intellectual parents in all of England. Her
mother, Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–1797) was perhaps the first great
feminist writer in history, renowned for her books and scandalous love
affairs. She had died giving birth to Mary. Mary’s father was William
Godwin (1756–1836), a celebrated writer and philosopher who
advocated many radical ideas, including the end of private property.
Famous writers would come to see the child Mary, for she was an
object of fascination, with striking red hair like her mother, the most
intense eyes, and an intelligence and imagination far beyond her years.
The Williamses would have almost certainly known about her
meeting the poet Percy Shelley when she was sixteen and their
infamous love affair. Shelley, of aristocratic origins and due to inherit a
fortune from his wealthy father, had married a young beauty named
Harriet, but he left her for Mary, and along with Mary’s stepsister
Claire, they traveled through Europe, living together and creating a
scandal everywhere they went. Shelley was an ardent believer in free
love and an avowed atheist. His wife Harriet subsequently committed
suicide, which Mary would forever feel guilty about, even later
imagining that the children she had had with Shelley were somehow
cursed. Shortly after the death of Harriet, Mary and Percy got married.
The Williamses would undoubtedly know about the Shelleys’
relationship with the other great rebel of the time, the poet Lord

[PAGE 291]
Byron. They had all spent time together in Switzerland, and it was
there, inspired by a midnight discussion of horror stories, that Mary
got the inspiration for her great novel Frankenstein, written when she
was nineteen. Lord Byron had his own scandals and numerous love
affairs. The three of them became a magnet for endless rumors, Lord
Byron now living in Italy as well. The English press had dubbed them
“the League of Incest and Atheism.”
At first Mary paid scant attention to the new English couple on the
scene, even after a few dinners together. She found Jane Williams a bit
dull and pretentious. As Mary wrote to her husband, who was away for
a few weeks: “Jane is certainly very pretty but she wants animation and
sense; her conversation is nothing particular and she speaks in a slow,
monotonous tone.” Jane was not well read. She loved nothing more
than to arrange flowers, play the pedal harp, sing songs from India,
where she had lived as a child, and pose rather prettily. Could she be
that superficial? Every now and then Mary would catch Jane staring at
her with an unpleasant look, which she quickly covered over with a
cheerful smile. More important, a common friend who had known the
Williamses in their travels across Europe had warned Mary in a letter
to keep her distance from Jane.
Edward Williams, however, was quite charming. He seemed to
worship Shelley and to want to be like him. He had aspirations to be a
writer. He was so eager to please and be of service. And then one day
he told Mary the story of the romance between him and Jane, and
Mary was quite moved.
The Williamses were not actually married. Jane Cleveland, who
came from the middle class, had married a high-ranking English
soldier, only to find out he was an abusive brute. When she met the
handsome Edward Williams—a military man who had lived in India, as
Jane had—she fell instantly in love. In 1819, although Jane was still
married to her first husband, she and Edward left for the Continent,
posing as a married couple. Like the Shelleys, they also had lived in
Switzerland and had come to Italy for adventure and the good weather.
Jane was now expecting her second child with Edward, just as Mary
was now pregnant again. It seemed, in a fateful way, that they had
much in common. More important, Mary empathized deeply with their
love affair and how much they had sacrificed for each other.

[PAGE 292]
Then Jane had her second child. Now the two women could bond as
young mothers. Finally someone to talk to about the difficulties of
raising infants in a foreign land, something Mary’s husband could care
less about. Besides, the Shelleys had no English friends, since English
expatriates in Italy avoided them like the plague. It would be such a
relief to have some daily companionship in this moment of turbulence
in her life. Mary quickly became dependent on Jane’s company and
forgot any misgivings she might have had about her.
Shelley seemed to warm up to the couple as well. Edward was so
officious in offering to help Shelley in any way. Edward loved sailing
and boasted of his navigational skills. Sailing was an obsession of
Shelley’s, despite the fact he had never learned to swim. Perhaps
Edward could help him design the perfect sailing boat. And Jane began
to intrigue him the more he spent time around her. Jane was so
different from Mary. She never argued. She only looked at him
admiringly and seconded everything he said. She was so cheerful. He
could be her teacher, instructing her in poetry, and she could be his
new muse, a role his depressed wife could not fill anymore. He bought
Jane a guitar and loved to listen to the songs from India she seemed to
know so well. She had a beautiful voice. He wrote poems in her honor
and slowly became infatuated.
Mary noticed all this. She knew well her husband’s pattern. He was
always looking for a woman very different from the one he was with to
inspire him and break the monotony of a relationship. His first wife,
Harriet, had been more like Jane, pretty and simple, and so he fell for
the much more complicated Mary. Now the pattern was repeating as
he fell for the simpler Jane. But how could she take Jane seriously as a
rival? She was so ordinary. He was simply poeticizing her; he would
eventually see her as she was and grow bored. Mary did not fear losing
him.
In 1822 the Shelleys and Williamses, now rather inseparable,
decided to move together into a house further north along the coast,
overlooking the Bay of Lerici. From the beginning Mary hated the
place and begged her husband to find something else. It was so
isolated. It was not easy to find supplies. The local peasants seemed
rather brutal and unfriendly. The two couples would be completely
dependent on their servants. Nobody besides Mary seemed interested
in running the household, least of all Jane, who had proven to be quite
lazy. But worse than everything, Mary had terrible forebodings about

[PAGE 293]
the place. She feared greatly for the fate of her child Percy, only three
years old. She smelled disaster in the walls of the isolated villa that
they occupied. She became nervous and hysterical. She knew she was
putting everyone off with her behavior, but she could not quell her
anxiety. Shelley reacted by spending more and more time with Jane.
Several months after settling at the villa, Mary had a miscarriage
and nearly died. Her husband attended to her for several weeks, and
she recovered. But just as quickly he seemed to become enamored with
a new plan that terrified Mary. He and Edward had designed a boat,
one that was beautiful to look at, sleek, and fast. In June of that year
some old friends of the Shelleys had arrived in Italy—Leigh Hunt and
his wife. Hunt was a publisher who championed young poets, and
Shelley was his favorite. Shelley planned to sail up the coast with
Edward to meet the Hunts. Mary was desperate for him not to go.
Shelley tried to reassure her: Edward was an expert navigator, and the
boat he had built was more than seaworthy. Mary did not believe this.
The boat seemed flimsy for the rough waters of the area.
Nevertheless Shelley and Edward left on July 1, with a third
crewmember. On July 8, as they started on their homeward journey,
they ran into one of the storms endemic to the region. Their boat had
indeed been badly designed, and went under. A few days later the
bodies of all three were found.
Almost immediately Mary was seized with remorse and guilt. She
played in her mind every angry word she had addressed to her
husband, every critique of his work, every doubt she had instilled in
him about her love. It was all too much, and she determined then and
there that she would devote the rest of her life to making Shelley’s
poetry famous.
At first Jane seemed extremely broken up by the tragedy, but she
recovered more quickly than Mary. She had to be practical. Mary might
have a nice inheritance from Shelley’s family. Jane had nothing. She
decided she would return to London and somehow find a way to
support her two children. Mary empathized with her plight. She gave
her a list of important contacts in England, including Shelley’s best
friend from his youth, Thomas Hogg, a lawyer. Hogg had his own
issues—he was always falling in love with the people closest to Shelley,
first Shelley’s sister, then Shelley’s first wife, and finally Mary herself,

[PAGE 294]
whom he tried to seduce. But that had been years ago, they remained
good friends, and as a lawyer Hogg could be of some help to Jane.
Mary decided to stay in Italy. She had hardly any friends left, but
the Hunts were still in Italy. Much to her dismay, however, Leigh Hunt
had become surprisingly cold to her. In this, her most vulnerable
moment, he had apparently lost all sympathy for her, and she could
not figure out why. This only added to her misery. Certainly he must
know how deeply she had loved her husband and the depth of her
mourning? She was not one to show her emotions as openly as Jane,
but deep inside she suffered more than anyone. Other former friends
were now acting cold as well. Only Lord Byron stood by her, and they
grew closer.
Soon it became apparent that Shelley’s parents, who had been
shocked by their son’s libertine ways, would not recognize Percy as
their grandson, certainly as long as he was in the care of Mary. There
would be no money for her. She thought the only answer was to return
to London. Perhaps if the Shelley family met Percy and saw what a
devoted mother she was, they might change their minds. She wrote to
Jane and to Hogg for their advice. The two of them had now become
close friends. Hogg seemed to think she should wait before returning;
his letter was remarkably cold. Here was yet another person who had
suddenly become distant. But it was the response of Jane that most
surprised her. She advised giving up Percy and not coming to England.
As Mary tried to explain how impossible that would be for her
emotionally, Jane became even more adamant in her opinion. She
expressed this in practical terms—Mary would not be welcomed in
London, the Shelley family would turn against her even more—but it
seemed so unsympathetic.
In the months together in Italy after the deaths of their husbands,
they had grown quite close. Jane was the last real link to Mary’s
husband left in her life. She had forgiven Jane for any indiscretions
with her husband. Losing Jane’s friendship would be like experiencing
another death. She decided she would in fact return to London with
her son and rekindle the friendship with Jane.
Mary returned to London in August of 1823, only to find that she
had become quite a celebrity. Frankenstein had been turned into a
play that emphasized the horror elements in the book. And it was quite
a sensation. The story and the name “Frankenstein” now had seeped

[PAGE 295]
into popular culture. Mary’s father, who had become a bookseller and
publisher, came out with a new edition of Frankenstein, with Mary
clearly identified as the author. (The first edition was published
anonymously.) Mary, her father, and Jane went to see the play version,
and it was clear now to all of them what an object of fascination Mary
had become to the public—this was the slight, very gentle woman who
had written such a powerful horror story?
When Lord Byron died in Greece shortly after Mary’s return to
London, Mary became even more famous, for she had been one of
Byron’s closest friends. All of the principal English intellectuals wanted
to meet her, to find out more about her, Lord Byron, and her husband.
Even Jane was now back to her friendly self, although at times she
seemed to withdraw from Mary.
Despite her fame, Mary was unhappy. She did not want the
attention, because it came with endless gossip about her past and
insinuations about her morality. She was tired of being looked at and
judged. She wanted to hide herself and raise her son. She decided she
would move close to where Jane was living, in a more remote part of
London. There Percy would be reunited with Jane’s children. They
could live for each other and share their memories, recapture the past.
Jane was so cheerful, and Mary needed cheering up. In return, she
would do whatever it took to take care of Jane.
In the summer of 1824 the two women saw much of each other. It
was now apparent that Hogg had been courting Jane, but he was such
an awkward and unpleasant man, Mary could hardly imagine Jane
reciprocating his attentions. Besides, it was so soon after the death of
her husband. But then one evening in January it became clear to Mary
that she had been deceived for quite a while. It was somewhat late at
night, at Jane’s house. She and Percy had stuck around, Percy to play
some games with Jane’s children and Mary to talk some more. Hogg
had arrived and Jane finally exploded at Mary, with a look Mary had
never seen before on her friend’s face. She asked Mary to leave so
abruptly and rudely that it was clear she and Hogg had been having an
affair and Jane could no longer conceal her irritation with Mary. She
had noticed for some time that Jane had become increasingly cold and
less interested in being with her. Now she understood this better.
They remained friends. Mary empathized with her plight as a lonely
widow, her need for a husband. Jane was now pregnant with Hogg’s

[PAGE 296]
child. Mary struggled to get over her resentment and to help Jane as
best she could. They saw less and less of each other.
To distract her from her loneliness, Mary befriended a beautiful
young woman named Isabel Robinson who needed help—she had
given birth to an illegitimate child and her father would certainly
disown her if he discovered the truth. For weeks Mary conspired to
help her, planning to send Isabel to Paris to live with a “man” who
would act as the father—the man in this case being a woman known as
Miss Dods, a notorious lesbian who loved to dress as a man and could
easily pass for one.
Mary delighted in furthering this plot, but before accompanying
Isabel to Paris, one afternoon she received the shock of her life: Isabel
confided to her in complete detail the stories that Jane had been telling
her for months about Mary—that Shelley had never really loved his
wife; that he had admired her but had had no feelings for her; that she
was not the woman he had needed or wanted; that Jane was in fact the
great love of his life. Jane had even hinted to Isabel that Mary had
made him so unhappy that he had secretly wanted to die the day he left
on his fatal sailing venture, and that Mary was somehow responsible
for his death.
Mary could hardly believe this, but Isabel had no reason to make up
such a story. And as she thought about it more deeply, suddenly things
began to make sense—the sudden coldness of Hogg, Leigh Hunt, and
others who must have heard these stories; the looks Jane occasionally
threw at Mary when she was the center of attention in a group; that
look on her face when she threw Mary out of her house; the vehemence
with which she wanted Mary to stay away from London and give up her
child, which meant giving up their inheritance. All these years she had
been not a friend but a competitor, and now it seemed clear that it was
not Mary’s husband who had pursued Jane but Jane who had actively
seduced him with her poses, her coquettish looks, her guitar, her put-
on soft manner. She was false to the core. It was, after the death of
Mary’s husband, the harshest blow of all.
Not only did Jane believe these monstrous stories, but she had
made others believe them. Mary knew how well her husband had loved
her over so many years, and after so many shared experiences. To
spread the story that she had somehow caused his death was beyond
hurtful; it was like a knife being plunged into an old wound. She wrote

[PAGE 297]
in her journal: “My friend has proved false & treacherous. Have I not
been a fool?”
After several months of brooding over this, Mary finally confronted
her. Jane burst into tears, creating a scene. She wanted to know who
had spread this awful story of her betrayal, which she denied. She
accused Mary of being cold and unaffectionate. But for Mary, it was as
if she had finally woken up from a dream. She could now see the fake
outrage, the phony love, the way Jane confused matters with her
drama. There was no going back.
Over the ensuing years Mary would not cut off ties with Jane, but
now their relationship was totally on her terms. Mary could only feel
some strange satisfaction to see Jane’s life slowly fall apart, the
relationship with Hogg turning into a disaster. As Mary became more
and more famous for her novels and her publishing of Shelley’s poems,
she mingled with the greatest writers and politicians of her time and
slowly cut off contact with Jane. She could never trust her again. As
she wrote some years later about this affair in her journal: “Life is not
ill till we wish to forget. Jane first inspired me with that miserable
feeling, staining past years as she did—taking sweetness from memory
and giving it instead a serpent’s tooth.”
• • •
Interpretation: Let us look at the many transformations that envy
causes in the mind, as we can clearly see in the example of Jane
Williams. When Jane first met Mary, she had conflicting emotions. On
the one hand, there was much to like and admire about Mary. She had
pleasant manners, was clearly brilliant, and felt deeply attached to her
son. She could be quite generous. On the other hand, she made Jane
feel deeply inferior; Jane lacked so many of the things that Mary had,
but which she felt she deserved—attention for her own talents, for her
willingness to sacrifice for love, for her charming nature. Inevitably,
along with the attraction to Mary came envy—the desire to have the
same things as Mary, the sense of being entitled to have them, but the
apparent inability to get them easily or legitimately. With envy comes
the secret desire to hurt, wound, or steal from the envied person, to
right the unfairness that comes with his or her supposed superiority.
There were many reasons for Jane to conceal and even repress the
envy stirring within her. First, it is socially toxic to display envy. It

[PAGE 298]
reveals deep insecurity along with hostility, a very ugly brew, which is
certain to push people away. Second, she and her husband depended
on the Shelleys for their future livelihood, since Jane was determined
to get Edward attached to Shelley as a friend, assistant, and sailing
expert. Shelley was notoriously generous with money. Acting in a
hostile manner toward Mary would have put that all in jeopardy.
Finally, envy is a painful emotion, an admission of our own inferiority,
something rather unbearable for us humans. It is not an emotion we
want to sit with and brood over. We like to conceal it from ourselves
and not be aware that it motivates our actions.
Considering all this, Jane took the natural next step: she befriended
Mary, returning Mary’s friendly advances and then some. A part of her
liked the woman and felt flattered at the attention shown to her by
someone so famous. Jane was avid for attention. How could she now
imagine herself as feeling envy toward Mary, if she had chosen to
become her friend? But the more time she spent around Mary, the
more the imbalance between them became apparent. It was Mary who
had the illustrious, handsome husband, the possible large inheritance,
the deep friendship with Lord Byron, and the rich imagination that
made her so talented. And so the more time she spent with Mary, the
stronger her envious feelings became.
To conceal this envy from herself and others now required the next
logical step: she had to mentally convert Mary into an unsympathetic
character. Mary was not so talented; she was merely lucky; if it weren’t
for her famous parents and the men around her, she never would have
gotten to her fortunate position; she did not deserve her fame; she was
an irritating person to be around, moody, depressive, clinging, no fun;
she was not nice or loving toward her husband and was not much of a
woman. As Jane went through this process, hostility began to
overwhelm friendly feelings. She felt more than justified in actively
seducing Percy Shelley and concealing her true feelings from Mary.
Most devastating to Mary’s marital relationship, every time her
husband complained to Jane about Mary, Jane would reinforce this
with some new story or observation, deepening the rift between them.
Of course, in turning Mary into someone so unlikable, Jane had to
willfully ignore the context—the recent loss of two beloved children to
illness, Shelley’s own coldness toward his wife, and his pursuit of other
women. But in order for enviers to feel entitled to take harmful action,
they must create a narrative: everything the other person does reveals

[PAGE 299]
some negative trait; they do not deserve their superior position. Now
Jane had what she had wanted—the adoring attention of Percy Shelley
along with the complete alienation of him from his wife. Once Shelley
died, she could vent her envy by spreading the malicious story that
Mary did not seem particularly sad at the loss, something so troubling
to those who heard this, including Leigh Hunt, that they distanced
themselves from Mary.
Once Jane was back in London and Mary joined her there, the
pattern repeated. A part of Jane was still drawn to Mary; over the years
they had shared much. But the more time she spent around her, the
more she had to see Mary’s growing fame, her circle of illustrious
friends, her generous nature toward other women who had been
mistreated, her total devotion to her son and to the memory of her
husband. None of this jibed with the narrative, and so Jane had to take
yet another step in her mind: “Mary is false, still living off the legacy of
her husband and others, motivated by her neediness, not by her
generosity. If only other people could see this.” So she stole Mary’s
friend Hogg, a weaker imitation of the original sin of stealing her
husband. And she continued to spread stories about Mary, but this
time with the added vicious twist that Jane was the last great love of
Shelley’s life, that he had never loved his wife, and that Mary had
driven him to suicide. Telling such lurid stories in London would do
maximum damage to Mary’s reputation.
It is hard to calculate the pain she inflicted over the years on Mary—
the quarrels with Mary’s husband exacerbated by Jane, the sudden
mysterious coldness of Mary’s closest friends, the push and pull Jane
played on Mary, always stepping back when Mary wanted more
closeness, and finally the revelation of the ultimate betrayal, and the
thought, which would haunt Mary for years, that so many had believed
Jane’s story. Such can be the hidden pain inflicted by one great envier.
Understand: Envy occurs most commonly and painfully among
friends. We assume that something in the course of the relationship
caused the friend to turn against us. Sometimes all we experience is the
betrayal, the sabotage, the ugly criticisms they throw at us, and we
never understand the underlying envy that inspired these actions.
What we need to grasp is something paradoxical: people who feel
envy in the first place are often motivated to become our friends. Like
Jane, they feel a mix of genuine interest, attraction, and envy, if we

[PAGE 300]
have some qualities that make them feel inferior. Becoming our friend,
they can disguise the envy to themselves. They will often go even
further, becoming extra attentive and impatient to secure our
friendship. But as they draw closer, the problem gets worse. The
underlying envy is continually stirred. The very traits that might have
stimulated feelings of inferiority—the good position, the solid work
ethic, the likability—are now being witnessed on a daily basis.
And so as with Jane, a narrative is gradually constructed: the envied
person is lucky, overly ambitious, not nearly so great. As our friends,
enviers can discover our weak points and what will wound the most.
From within a friendship they are better positioned to sabotage us,
steal our spouse, spread mayhem. Once they attack us, we tend to feel
guilty and confused: “Perhaps I deserve some of their criticisms.” If we
respond angrily, this only feeds the narrative of our unlikable nature.
Because we were friends, we feel doubly wounded and betrayed, and
the deeper the wound, the greater the satisfaction for the envier. We
can even speculate that the envier is unconsciously drawn to
befriending the envied person in order to have this wounding power.
Although such fatal friends are elusive and tricky, there are always
warning signs. Learn to pay deeper attention to your first impressions.
(If only Mary had done so.) Often we intuit that the other person is
false but then forget this as they make friendly overtures. We always
feel better about people who seem to like us, and enviers know this
well. Rely upon the opinions of friends and neutral third parties. Many
friends of Mary found Jane conniving and even a bit scary. The envy of
the friend will also tend to leak out in sudden looks and disparaging
comments. Enviers will give puzzling advice—something that seems
against our interests but well reasoned on their part. They want us to
make mistakes and will often try to find a way to lead us into them.
Any success or increase in attention that we experience will cause
greater leakage of their true feelings.
It is not a question of becoming paranoid but simply of being alert
once you pick up some signs of possible envy. Learn to spot the types
particularly prone to feeling envy (see the next section for more on
this) before you become too enmeshed in their drama. It is hard to
measure what you will gain by avoiding an envy attack, but think of it
this way: the pain inflicted by one envier friend can resonate and
poison you for years.

[PAGE 301]
Every time a friend succeeds, I die a little.
—Gore Vidal
Keys to Human Nature
Of all the human emotions, none is trickier or more elusive than envy.
It is very difficult to actually discern the envy that motivates people’s
actions or to even know that we have suffered an envy attack from
another. This is what makes it so frustrating to deal with and so
dangerous.
The reason for this elusiveness is simple: we almost never directly
express the envy we are feeling. If we feel anger toward people because
of something they said or did, we may try to disguise our anger for
various reasons, but we are aware that we are feeling hostile.
Eventually the anger will leak out in some nonverbal behavior. And if
we act upon our anger, the target will feel it for what it is and more
often than not know what caused the anger in that moment. But envy
is very different.
All of us feel envy, the sensation that others have more of what we
want—possessions, attention, respect. We deserve to have as much as
they do yet feel somewhat helpless to get such things. But as discussed
above, envy entails the admission to ourselves that we are inferior to
another person in something we value. Not only is it painful to admit
this inferiority, but it is even worse for others to see that we are feeling
this.
And so almost as soon as we feel the initial pangs of envy, we are
motivated to disguise it to ourselves—it is not envy we feel but
unfairness at the distribution of goods or attention, resentment at this
unfairness, even anger. Furthermore, the other person is not really
superior but simply lucky, overly ambitious, or unscrupulous. That’s
how they got to where they are. Having convinced ourselves that envy
is not motivating us but something else, we also make it very difficult
for others to detect the underlying envy. They see only our anger,
indignation, hostile criticisms, poisonous praise, and so on.
In ancient times, those who felt intense envy might have acted upon
it through violence, forcefully taking what the other had or even
resorting to murder. In the Old Testament, Cain murdered Abel out of
envy; the brothers of Joseph threw him in a ditch in the desert to die
because their father seemed to favor him; on several occasions King

[PAGE 302]
Saul tried to kill the younger David, so handsome and naturally gifted,
finally going mad with envy.
Today, however, people are much more political and indirect, able
to control any overt aggressive impulses and disguise what they’re
feeling. Instead of violence, enviers are likely to sabotage our work,
ruin a relationship, sully our reputation, torment us with criticisms
that are aimed at our most basic insecurities. This allows them to
maintain their social position while causing harm, their targets not
even suspecting envy as the motivation. They can justify these actions
to themselves as righting the perceived imbalance or unfairness.
If someone is angry with us and acts on it, we can analyze the anger
this person is feeling and figure out a way to defuse it or defend
ourselves. But if we cannot see the underlying envy, we are inevitably
confused by the hostile action of the envier, and this confusion doubles
the pain we experience. “Why are people suddenly being so cold to
me?” “Why did that project fail so unexpectedly?” “Why have I been
fired?” “Why is this person against me?”
Your task as a student of human nature is to transform yourself into
a master decoder of envy. You are ruthless in your analysis and your
determination to get to the root of what motivates people. The signs
that people emit of envy are harder to discern, but they exist, and you
can master the language with some effort and subtle discernment.
Think of it as an intellectual challenge. By being able to decode it, you
will not feel so confused. You will understand in hindsight that you
suffered an envy attack, which will help you get over it. You might be
able to see in advance the warning signs of such an attack and either
defuse or deflect it. And knowing the hidden pain that comes from one
well-aimed envy attack, you will spare yourself the emotional damage
that can last for years. This will not make you paranoid but only better
able to weed out the false and fatal friends (or colleagues) from the real
ones, the ones you can truly trust.
Before immersing yourself in the subtleties of the emotion, it is
important to distinguish between passive and active envy. All of us in
the course of a day will inevitably feel some pangs of envy, as we
unconsciously monitor the people around us and sense that they might
have more. It is a fact of social life that there are always people who are
superior to us in wealth, intelligence, likability, and other qualities. If
these pangs rise to the level of consciousness and are a bit acute, we

[PAGE 303]
might say something hurtful or mean-spirited as a way to vent the
emotion. But generally as we experience this passive form of envy, we
do not do anything that would in any meaningful way harm the
relationship with a friend or colleague. In detecting signs of passive
envy in others (for instance, little put-downs and offhand comments),
you should simply tolerate this as a fact of being a social animal.
Sometimes, however, this passive envy turns active. The underlying
sense of inferiority is too strong, leading to hostility that cannot be
vented by a comment or put-down. Sitting with one’s envy over a long
period of time can be painful and frustrating. Feeling righteous
indignation against the envied person, however, can be invigorating.
Acting on envy, doing something to harm the other person, brings
satisfaction, as it did to Jane, although the satisfaction is short-lived
because enviers always find something new to envy.
Your goal is to detect the signs of this more acute form of envy
before it turns dangerous. You can do this in three ways: by learning
the signs of envy that manage to leak through, by being aware of the
types of people who are more prone to acting on envy, and by
understanding the circumstances and actions that might trigger active
envy in people. You can never see all of the actions motivated by envy;
people are simply too good at disguising it. But using all three
decoding devices will increase your chances of detection.
Signs of Envy
Although the signs are subtle, envious feelings tend to leak out and can
be detected if you are observant. Seeing one such sign in isolation
might indicate passive or weak envy. You want to look for
combinations or repetitions of the following signs, a pattern, before
moving to alert mode.
Microexpressions: When people first experience envy, they have not
yet fooled themselves into thinking it is something else, and so they are
more prone to leakage than later on. That is why first impressions are
often the most accurate and should be given added weight in this case.
Envy is most associated with the eyes. The root of the Latin word for
envy, invidia, means “to look through, to probe with the eyes like a
dagger.” The early meaning of the word was associated with the “evil

[PAGE 304]
eye” and the belief that a look could actually convey a curse and
physically harm someone.
The eyes are indeed a telling indicator, but the envious
microexpression affects the entire face. You will notice the envier’s
eyes momentarily boring into you, with a look that suggests disdain
and a touch of hostility. It is the look of a child who feels cheated. With
this look the corners of the mouth will often be turned down, the nose
in a sneering, somewhat upturned position, the chin jutting out.
Although the look will be a little too direct and held a little too long, it
still will not last more than a second or two. It is usually followed with
a strained, fake smile. Often you will see the look by accident, as you
suddenly turn your head their direction, or you will feel their eyes
burning into you without directly looking at them.
The German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860)
devised a quick way to elicit these looks and test for envy. Tell
suspected enviers some good news about yourself—a promotion, a new
and exciting love interest, a book contract. You will notice a very quick
expression of disappointment. Their tone of voice as they congratulate
you will betray some tension and strain. Equally, tell them some
misfortune of yours and notice the uncontrollable microexpression of
joy in your pain, what is commonly known as schadenfreude. Their
eyes light up for a fleeting second. People who are envious cannot help
feeling some glee when they hear of the bad luck of those they envy.
If you see such looks in the first few encounters with someone, as
Mary did with Jane, and they happen more than once, be on the
lookout for a dangerous envier entering your life.
Poisonous praise: A major envy attack is often preceded by little envy
bites—offhand comments expertly designed to get under your skin.
Confusing, paradoxical praise is a common form of this. Let us say you
have completed a project—a book, a film, some creative venture—and
the initial response from the public is quite positive. Enviers will make
a comment praising the money you will now be making, implying that
that is the main reason you have worked on it. You want praise for the
work itself and the effort that went into it, and instead they imply that
you have done it for the money, that you have sold out. You feel
confused—they have praised you, but in a way that makes you
uncomfortable. These comments will also come at moments chosen to

[PAGE 305]
cause maximum doubt and damage, for instance just when you have
heard the good news and feel a flush of joy.
Similarly, in noting your success, they may bring up the least likable
parts of your audience, the kinds of fans or consumers who do not
reflect well on you. “Well, I’m sure Wall Street executives are going to
love this.” This is thrown in among other normal comments, but the
guilt by association lingers in your mind. Or they will praise something
once you have lost it—a job, a house in a nice neighborhood, a spouse
who has left you. “That was such a beautiful house. What a shame.” It’s
all said in a way that seems compassionate but has a discomforting
effect. Poisonous praise almost always indicates envy. They feel the
need to praise, but what dominates is the underlying hostility. If they
have a habit of praising in this way, if you experience it several times, it
is probably an indication of something more intense stirring within
them.
Backbiting: If people like to gossip a lot, particularly about common
acquaintances, you can be sure they will gossip about you. And gossip
is a frequent cover for envy, a convenient way to vent it by sharing
malicious rumors and stories. When they talk about others behind
their backs, you will see their eyes light up and their voice become
animated—it gives them a joy comparable to schadenfreude. They will
elicit any kind of negative report about a common acquaintance. A
frequent theme in their gossip is that no one’s really that great, and
people aren’t what they pretend to be.
If you ever get wind of a story they have spread about you, subtly or
not so subtly negative, only one such instance should be enough to
raise your antennae. What indicates active envy in this case is that they
are your friend and they feel the need to vent their underlying hostility
to a third party rather than keep it to themselves. If you notice that
friends or colleagues are suddenly cooler to you than before for no
apparent reason, such gossiping might be the source and would be
worth ferreting out. In any event, serial gossipers do not make loyal
and trustworthy friends.
The push and pull: As we saw in the Jane Williams story, enviers often
use friendship and intimacy as the best way to wound the people they
envy. They display unusual eagerness to become your friend. They
saturate you with attention. If you are in any way insecure, this will
have great effect. They praise you a little too effusively too early on.

[PAGE 306]
Through the closeness they establish they are able to gather material
on you and find your weak points. Suddenly, after your emotions are
engaged, they criticize you in pointed ways. The criticism is confusing,
not particularly related to anything you have done, but still you feel
guilty. They then return to their initial warmth. The pattern repeats.
You are trapped between the warm friendship and the occasional pain
they inflict.
In criticizing you, they are experts at picking out any possible flaws
in your character or words you might have regretted, and giving them
great emphasis. They are like lawyers building a case against you.
When you’ve had enough and decide to defend yourself or criticize
them or break off the friendship, they can now ascribe to you a mean
or even cruel streak and tell others of this. You will notice in their past
other intense relationships with dramatic breakups, always the other
person’s fault. And at the source of this pattern, something hard to
discern, is that they choose to befriend people whom they envy for
some quality, then subtly torture them.
In general, criticism of you that seems sincere but not directly
related to anything you have actually done is usually a strong sign of
envy. People want to bully and overwhelm you with something
negative, both wounding you and covering any tracks of envy.
Envier Types
According to the psychoanalyst Melanie Klein (1882–1960), certain
people are prone to feeling envy their entire lives, and this begins in
early infancy. In the first few weeks and months of life, the mother and
infant are almost never out of each other’s presence. But as they get
older, infants must deal with the mother’s absence for longer periods
of time, and this entails a painful adjustment. Some infants, however,
are more sensitive to the mother’s occasional withdrawal. They are
greedy for more feeding and more attention. They become aware of the
presence of the father, with whom they must compete for the mother’s
attention. They may also become aware of other siblings, who are seen
as rivals. Klein, who specialized in the study of infancy and early
childhood, noticed that some children feel greater degrees of hostility
and resentment toward the father and siblings for the attention they
are receiving at their (the enviers’) expense, and toward the mother for
not giving them enough.

[PAGE 307]
Certainly there are parents who create or intensify such envy by
playing favorites, by withdrawing on purpose to make the child more
dependent. In any event, infants or children experiencing such envy
will not feel grateful and loved for the attention they do get but instead
feel continually deprived and unsatisfied. A pattern is set for their
entire lives—they are children and later adults for whom nothing is
ever quite good enough. All potentially positive experiences are spoiled
by the sensation that they should have more and better. Something is
missing, and they can only imagine that other people are cheating
them out of what they should have. They develop an eagle eye for what
others have that they don’t. This becomes their dominant passion.
Most of us experience moments in childhood in which we feel
another person is getting more of the attention that we deserve, but we
are able to counterbalance this with other moments in which we
experience undeniable love, and gratitude for it. As we get older, we
can transfer such positive emotions to a series of people—siblings,
teachers, mentors, friends, lovers, and spouses. We alternate between
wanting more and feeling relatively satisfied and grateful. Those prone
to envy, however, do not experience life the same way. Instead, they
transfer their initial envy and hostility to a series of others whom they
see as disappointing or hurting them. Their moments of satisfaction
and gratitude are rare or nonexistent. “I need, I want more,” they are
always telling themselves.
Because envy is a painful sensation, these types will enact lifelong
strategies to mitigate or repress these feelings that gnaw at them. They
will denigrate anything or anyone good in the world. This means there
aren’t really people out there worth envying. Or they will become
extremely independent. If they do not need people for anything, that
will expose them to fewer envy scenarios. At an extreme they will
devalue themselves. They don’t deserve good things in life and so have
no need to compete with others for attention and status. According to
Klein, these common strategies are brittle and will break down under
stress—a downturn in their career, bouts of depression, wounds to
their ego. The envy they experienced in their earliest years remains
continually latent and ready to be directed at others. They are literally
looking for people to envy so they can reexperience the primal
emotion.
Depending on their psychological makeup, they will tend to
conform to certain envying types. It is of great benefit to be able to

[PAGE 308]
recognize such types early on, because they are the ones most likely to
turn active with their envy. The following are five common varieties of
enviers, how they tend to disguise themselves, and their particular
forms of attack.
The Leveler: When you first meet them, levelers can seem rather
entertaining and interesting. They tend to have a wicked sense of
humor. They are good at putting down those who are powerful and
deflating the pretentious. They also seem to have a keen nose for
injustice and unfairness in this world. But where they differ from
people with genuine empathy for underdogs is that levelers cannot
recognize or appreciate excellence in almost anyone, except those who
are dead. They have fragile egos. Those who have achieved things in
life make them feel insecure. They are highly sensitive to feelings of
inferiority. The envy they initially feel for those who are successful is
quickly covered up by indignation. They rail at high achievers for
gaming the system, for being far too ambitious, or simply for being
lucky and not really deserving praise. They have come to associate
excellence with unfairness, as a way to soothe their insecurities.
You will notice that though they can put others down, they do not
take easily to any jokes at their expense. They often celebrate low
culture and trash, because mediocre work does not stir their
insecurities. Besides their cynical humor, you can recognize this type
by how they talk about their own life: they love to tell stories of the
many injustices inflicted on them; they are always blameless. These
types make excellent professional critics—they can use this medium to
tear down those they secretly envy and be rewarded for it.
Their main goal is to bring everyone down to the same mediocre
level they occupy. This sometimes means leveling not only achievers
and the powerful but also those who are having too good a time, who
seem to be enjoying themselves too much, or who have too great a
sense of purpose, which levelers lack.
Be wary around such types, particularly in the workplace, because
they will make you feel guilty for your own impulse to excel. They will
begin with passive-aggressive comments that taint you with the ugly
word “ambition.” You might be a part of the oppressor class. They will
criticize you in ugly and hurtful ways. They may follow this up with
active sabotage of your work, which they justify to themselves as a
form of retributive justice.

[PAGE 309]
The Self-entitled Slacker: In the world today many people rightfully
feel entitled to have success and the good things in life, but they
usually understand that this will require sacrifice and hard work. Some
people, however, feel they deserve attention and many rewards in life
as if these are naturally due to them. These self-entitled slackers are
generally quite narcissistic. They will make the briefest outline for a
novel or screenplay they want to write, or an “idea” for a brilliant
business, and feel that that is enough to attract praise and attention.
But deep down, these slackers feel insecure about their ability to get
what they want; that is why they have never really developed the
proper discipline. When they find themselves around high achievers
who work very hard and have earned true respect for their work, this
will make them aware of the doubts about themselves they have been
trying to repress. They will move quickly from envy to hostility.
Christopher Wren (1632–1723) was one of the great geniuses of his
age, a renowned scientist and one of the leading architects of the time,
his most famous work being St. Paul’s Cathedral in London. Wren was
also generally beloved by almost everyone who worked with him. His
enthusiasm, his obvious skill, and the long hours he gave on the job
made him popular with both the public and the workers on his
projects. One man, however, came to deeply envy him—William
Talman, a lower-level architect appointed as Wren’s assistant on
several important jobs. Talman believed that their roles should have
been reversed; he had an extremely high opinion of himself, a rather
sour attitude, and a pronounced lazy streak.
When a couple of accidents occurred on two of Wren’s projects,
killing some workmen, Talman went into overdrive, accusing his boss
of being negligent. He dug up every other possible misdeed in Wren’s
long career, trying to make the case that he did not deserve his lofty
reputation. For years he waged a campaign to besmirch Wren’s
reputation, calling him careless with lives and money and generally
overrated. He so muddied the waters that the king finally gave some
important commissions to the much less talented Talman, infuriating
Wren. Talman proceeded to steal and incorporate many of Wren’s
innovations. The ugly battle with Talman had a debilitating emotional
effect on Wren that lasted years.
Be extra careful in the work environment with those who like to
maintain their position through charm and being political, rather than
by getting things done. They are very prone to envying and hating

[PAGE 310]
those who work hard and get results. They will slander and sabotage
you without any warning.
The Status Fiend: As social animals we humans are very sensitive to
our rank and position within any group. We can measure our status by
the attention and respect we receive. We are constantly monitoring
differences and comparing ourselves with others. But for some people
status is more than a way of measuring social position—it is the most
important determinant of their self-worth. You will notice such fiends
by the questions they ask about how much money you make, whether
you own your home, what kind of neighborhood it’s in, whether you
occasionally fly business class, and all of the other petty things that
they can use as points of comparison. If you are of a higher social
status than they are, they will conceal their envy by appearing to
admire your success. But if you are a peer or happen to work with
them, they will be sniffing for any sign of favoritism or privileges they
don’t have, and they will attack you in underhanded ways,
undermining your position within the group.
For baseball Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson (b. 1946), his Yankee
teammate Graig Nettles fit this type. To Jackson, Nettles seemed
extremely attentive to the credit and accolades others were getting that
he was not. He was always discussing and comparing salaries. What
embittered Nettles was the size of Jackson’s salary and the attention he
got from the media. Jackson had earned the salary and attention he
received through his batting prowess and colorful personality, but the
envious Nettles saw it differently. He thought Jackson simply knew
how to play the media and cozy up to the Yankees owner George
Steinbrenner. Jackson, he decided, was a manipulator. His envy leaked
out in wicked jokes at Jackson’s expense, poisonous praise, and hostile
looks. He turned much of the Yankee clubhouse against Jackson and
made his life miserable. As Jackson wrote of him in his autobiography,
“I always had the feeling he was behind me, ready to turn the knife.”
He also felt there was some tacit racism in Nettles’s envy, as if a black
athlete could not possibly earn a salary that much larger than his own.
Recognize status fiends by how they reduce everything to material
considerations. When they comment on the clothes you wear or the car
you drive, they seem to focus on the money these things must have
cost, and as they talk about such things, you will notice something
childish in their demeanor, as if they were reliving a family drama in
which they felt cheated by a sibling who had something better. Don’t

[PAGE 311]
be fooled by their driving an older car or dressing shabbily. These types
will often try to assert their status in the opposite direction, by being
the consummate monk, the idealistic hippie, while secretly yearning
for the luxuries they cannot get through hard work. If you are around
such types, try to downplay or conceal what you have that might
trigger envy, and talk up their possessions, skills, and status in
whatever way you can.
The Attacher: In any court-like environment of power, you will
inevitably find people who are drawn to those who are successful or
powerful, not out of admiration but out of secret envy. They find a way
to attach themselves as friends or assistants. They make themselves
useful. They may admire their boss for some qualities, but deep down
they believe they are entitled to have some of the attention he or she is
getting, without all the hard work. The longer they are around the high
achiever, the more this feeling gnaws at them. They have talent, they
have dreams—why should the person they work for be so favored?
They are good at concealing the undercurrent of envy through
excessive fawning. But these types attach themselves because it gives
them some kind of satisfaction to spoil and wound the person who has
more. They are drawn to the powerful out of a desire to harm them in
some way.
Yolanda Saldivar (b. 1960) is an extreme example of the type. She
started a major fan club for the popular Tejano singer Selena, then
ingratiated herself into Selena’s business by becoming manager of her
clothing stores and accumulated more power. No one was more
sycophantic to the singer. But feeling deeply envious of the fame of
Selena and turning quite hostile, she began to embezzle funds from the
business, which she felt more than justified in doing. When confronted
about this by Selena’s father, her response was to plot to murder
Selena herself, which she finally did in 1995.
These types have a trait that is quite common to all enviers: they
lack a clear sense of purpose in their life (see