chapter 1: no one is crazy. People make

chapter 1: no one is crazy. People make
financial decisions they regret, and they often do so with
scarce information and without logic. But the decisions
made sense to them when they were made. Blaming
bubbles on greed and stopping there misses important
lessons about how and why people rationalize what in
hindsight look like greedy decisions.
Part of why bubbles are hard to learn from is that they are
not like cancer, where a biopsy gives us a clear warning and
diagnosis. They are closer to the rise and fall of a political
party, where the outcome is known in hindsight but the
cause and blame are never agreed upon.
Competition for investment returns is fierce, and someone
has to own every asset at every point in time. That means
the mere idea of bubbles will always be controversial,

[PAGE 175]
because no one wants to think they own an overvalued
asset. In hindsight we’re more likely to point cynical fingers
than to learn lessons.
I don’t think we’ll ever be able to fully explain why bubbles
occur. It’s like asking why wars occur—there are almost
always several reasons, many of them conflicting, all of
them controversial.
It’s too complicated a subject for simple answers.
But let me propose one reason they happen that both goes
overlooked and applies to you personally: Investors often
innocently take cues from other investors who are playing a
different game than they are.
An idea exists in finance that seems innocent but has done
incalculable damage.
It’s the notion that assets have one rational price in a world
where investors have different goals and time horizons.
Ask yourself: How much should you pay for Google stock
today?
The answer depends on who “you” are.
Do you have a 30-year time horizon? Then the smart price to
pay involves a sober analysis of Google’s discounted cash
flows over the next 30 years.
Are you looking to cash out within 10 years? Then the price
to pay can be figured out by an analysis of the tech

[PAGE 176]
industry’s potential over the next decade and whether
Google management can execute on its vision.
Are you looking to sell within a year? Then pay attention to
Google’s current product sales cycles and whether we’ll
have a bear market.
Are you a day trader? Then the smart price to pay is “who
cares?” because you’re just trying to squeeze a few bucks
out of whatever happens between now and lunchtime,
which can be accomplished at any price.
When investors have different goals and time horizons—and
they do in every asset class—prices that look ridiculous to
one person can make sense to another, because the factors
those investors pay attention to are different.
Take the dot-com bubble in the 1990s.
People can look at Yahoo! stock in 1999 and say “That was
crazy! A zillion times revenue! The valuation made no
sense!”
But many investors who owned Yahoo! stock in 1999 had
time horizons so short that it made sense for them to pay a
ridiculous price. A day trader could accomplish what they
need whether Yahoo! was at $5 a share or $500 a share as
long as it moved in the right direction that day. And it did,
for years.
An iron rule of finance is that money chases returns to the
greatest extent that it can. If an asset has momentum—it’s
been moving consistently up for a period of time—it’s not
crazy for a group of short-term traders to assume it will keep
moving up. Not indefinitely; just for the short period of time
they need it to. Momentum attracts short-term traders in a
reasonable way.

[PAGE 177]
Then it’s off to the races.
Bubbles form when the momentum of short-term returns
attracts enough money that the makeup of investors shifts
from mostly long term to mostly short term.
That process feeds on itself. As traders push up short-term
returns, they attract even more traders. Before long—and it
often doesn’t take long—the dominant market price-setters
with the most authority are those with shorter time
horizons.
Bubbles aren’t so much about valuations rising. That’s just a
symptom of something else: time horizons shrinking as
more short-term traders enter the playing field.
It’s common to say the dot-com bubble was a time of
irrational optimism about the future. But one of the most
common headlines of that era was announcing record
trading volume, which is what happens when investors are
buying and selling in a single day. Investors—particularly the
ones setting prices—were not thinking about the next 20
years. The average mutual fund had 120% annual turnover
in 1999, meaning they were, at most, thinking about the
next eight months. So were the individual investors who
bought those mutual funds. Maggie Mahar wrote in her book
Bull!:
By the mid-nineties, the press had replaced annual
scorecards with reports that appeared every three months.
The change spurred investors to chase performance, rushing
to buy the funds at the top of the charts, just when they
were most expensive.

[PAGE 178]
This was the era of day trading, short-term option contracts,
and up-to-the minute market commentary. It’s not the kind
of thing you’d associate with long-term views.
The same thing happened during the housing bubble of the
mid-2000s.
It’s hard to justify paying $700,000 for a two-bedroom
Florida track home to raise your family in for the next 10
years. But it makes perfect sense if you plan on flipping the
home in a few months into a market with rising prices to
make a quick profit. Which is exactly what many people
were doing during the bubble.
Data from Attom, a company that tracks real estate
transactions, shows the number of houses in America that
sold more than once in a 12-month period—they were
flipped—rose fivefold during the bubble, from 20,000 in the
first quarter of 2000 to over 100,000 in the first quarter of
2004.⁵⁴ Flipping plunged after the bubble to less than
40,000 per quarter, where it’s roughly remained since.
Do you think these flippers cared about long-term price-to-
rent ratios? Or whether the prices they paid were backed up
by long-term income growth? Of course not. Those numbers
weren’t relevant to their game. The only thing that mattered
to flippers was that the price of the home would be more
next month than it was this month. And for many years, it
was.
You can say a lot about these investors. You can call them
speculators. You can call them irresponsible. You can shake
your head at their willingness to take huge risks.
But I don’t think you can call all of them irrational.

[PAGE 179]
The formation of bubbles isn’t so much about people
irrationally participating in long-term investing. They’re
about people somewhat rationally moving toward short-
term trading to capture momentum that had been feeding
on itself.
What do you expect people to do when momentum creates
a big short-term return potential? Sit and watch patiently?
Never. That’s not how the world works. Profits will always be
chased. And short-term traders operate in an area where the
rules governing long-term investing—particularly around
valuation—are ignored, because they’re irrelevant to the
game being played.
That’s where things get interesting, and where the problems
begin.
Bubbles do their damage when long-term investors playing
one game start taking their cues from those short-term
traders playing another.
Cisco stock rose 300% in 1999 to $60 per share. At that
price the company was valued at $600 billion, which is
insane. Few actually thought it was worth that much; the
day-traders were just having their fun. Economist Burton
Malkiel once pointed out that Cisco’s implied growth rate at
that valuation meant it would become larger than the entire
U.S. economy within 20 years.
But if you were a long-term investor in 1999, $60 was the
only price available to buy. And many people were buying it
at that price. So you may have looked around and said to
yourself, “Wow, maybe these other investors know
something I don’t.” Maybe you went along with it. You even
felt smart about it.

[PAGE 180]
What you don’t realize is that the traders who were setting
the marginal price of the stock were playing a different
game than you were. Sixty dollars a share was a reasonable
price for the traders, because they planned on selling the
stock before the end of the day, when its price would
probably be higher. But sixty dollars was a disaster in the
making for you, because you planned on holding shares for
the long run.
These two investors rarely even know that each other exist.
But they’re on the same field, running toward each other.
When their paths blindly collide, someone gets hurt. Many
finance and investment decisions are rooted in watching
what other people do and either copying them or betting
against them. But when you don’t know why someone
behaves like they do you won’t know how long they’ll
continue acting that way, what will make them change their
mind, or whether they’ll ever learn their lesson.
When a commentator on CNBC says, “You should buy this
stock,” keep in mind that they do not know who you are. Are
you a teenager trading for fun? An elderly widow on a
limited budget? A hedge fund manager trying to shore up
your books before the quarter ends? Are we supposed to
think those three people have the same priorities, and that
whatever level a particular stock is trading at is right for all
three of them?
It’s crazy.
It’s hard to grasp that other investors have different goals
than we do, because an anchor of psychology is not realizing
that rational people can see the world through a different
lens than your own. Rising prices persuade all investors in
ways the best marketers envy. They are a drug that can turn
value-conscious investors into dewy-eyed optimists,

[PAGE 181]
detached from their own reality by the actions of someone
playing a different game than they are.
Being swayed by people playing a different game can also
throw off how you think you’re supposed to spend your
money. So much consumer spending, particularly in
developed countries, is socially driven: subtly influenced by
people you admire, and done because you subtly want
people to admire you.
But while we can see how much money other people spend
on cars, homes, clothes, and vacations, we don’t get to see
their goals, worries, and aspirations. A young lawyer aiming
to be a partner at a prestigious law firm might need to
maintain an appearance that I, a writer who can work in
sweatpants, have no need for. But when his purchases set
my own expectations, I’m wandering down a path of
potential disappointment because I’m spending the money
without the career boost he’s getting. We might not even
have different styles. We’re just playing a different game. It
took me years to figure this out.
A takeaway here is that few things matter more with money
than understanding your own time horizon and not being
persuaded by the actions and behaviors of people playing
different games than you are.
The main thing I can recommend is going out of your way to
identify what game you’re playing.
It’s surprising how few of us do. We call everyone investing
money “investors” like they’re basketball players, all playing
the same game with the same rules. When you realize how
wrong that notion is you see how vital it is to simply identify
what game you’re playing. How I invest my own money is
detailed in chapter 20, but years ago I wrote out “I am a

[PAGE 182]
passive investor optimistic in the world’s ability to generate
real economic growth and I’m confident that over the next
30 years that growth will accrue to my investments.”
This might seem quaint, but once you write that mission
statement down you realize everything that’s unrelated to it
—what the market did this year, or whether we’ll have a
recession next year—is part of a game I’m not playing. So I
don’t pay attention to it, and am in no danger of being
persuaded by it.
Next, let’s talk about pessimism.

[PAGE 183]


[PAGE 184]
“For reasons I have never understood, people like to hear
that the world is going to hell.”
—Historian Deirdre McCloskey
Optimism is the best bet for most people because the world
tends to get better for most people most of the time.
But pessimism holds a special place in our hearts.
Pessimism isn’t just more common than optimism. It also
sounds smarter. It’s intellectually captivating, and it’s paid
more attention than optimism, which is often viewed as
being oblivious to risk.
Before we go further we should define what optimism is.
Real optimists don’t believe that everything will be great.
That’s complacency. Optimism is a belief that the odds of a
good outcome are in your favor over time, even when there
will be setbacks along the way. The simple idea that most
people wake up in the morning trying to make things a little
better and more productive than wake up looking to cause
trouble is the foundation of optimism. It’s not complicated.
It’s not guaranteed, either. It’s just the most reasonable bet
for most people, most of the time. The late statistician Hans
Rosling put it differently: “I am not an optimist. I am a very
serious possibilist.”
Now we can discuss optimism’s more compelling sibling:
pessimism.

[PAGE 185]
December 29th, 2008.
The worst year for the economy in modern history is about
to close. Stock markets around the world had collapsed. The
global financial system was on day-to-day life support.
Unemployment was surging.
As things looked like they couldn’t get worse, The Wall
Street Journal published a story arguing that we hadn’t seen
anything yet. It ran a front-page article on the outlook of a
Russian professor named Igor Panarin whose economic
views rival the flair of science fiction writers.
The Journal wrote:
Around the end of June 2010, or early July, [Panarin] says,
the U.S. will break into six pieces—with Alaska reverting to
Russian control ... California will form the nucleus of what he
calls “The Californian Republic,” and will be part of China or
under Chinese influence. Texas will be the heart of “The
Texas Republic,” a cluster of states that will go to Mexico or
fall under Mexican influence. Washington, D.C., and New
York will be part of an “Atlantic America” that may join the
European Union. Canada will grab a group of Northern
states Prof. Panarin calls “The Central North American
Republic.” Hawaii, he suggests, will be a protectorate of
Japan or China, and Alaska will be subsumed into Russia.⁵⁵
This was not the ramblings of a backroom blog or tinfoil-hat
newsletter. This was on the front page of the most
prestigious financial newspaper in the world.

[PAGE 186]
It is fine to be pessimistic about the economy. It’s even OK to
be apocalyptic. History is full of examples of countries
experiencing not just recessions, but disintegrations.
The interesting thing about Panarin-type stories is that their
polar opposite—forecasts of outrageous optimism—are
rarely taken as seriously as prophets of doom.
Take Japan in the late 1940s. The nation was gutted by
defeat from World War II in every way—economically,
industrially, culturally, socially. A brutal winter in 1946
caused a famine that limited food to less than 800 calories
per person per day.⁵⁶
Imagine if a Japanese academic had written a newspaper
article during this time that said:
Chin up, everyone. Within our lifetime our economy will
grow to almost 15 times the size it was before the end of the
war. Our life expectancy will nearly double. Our stock market
will produce returns like any country in history has rarely
seen. We will go more than 40 years without ever seeing
unemployment top 6%. We will become a world leader in
electronic innovation and corporate managerial systems.
Before long we will be so rich that we will own some of the
most prized real estate in the United States. Americans, by
the way, will be our closest ally and will try to copy our
economic insights.
They would have been summarily laughed out of the room
and asked to seek a medical evaluation.

[PAGE 187]
Keep in mind the description above is what actually
happened in Japan in the generation after the war. But the
mirror opposite of Panarin looks absurd in a way a forecast
of doom doesn’t.
Pessimism just sounds smarter and more plausible than
optimism.
Tell someone that everything will be great and they’re likely
to either shrug you off or offer a skeptical eye. Tell someone
they’re in danger and you have their undivided attention.
If a smart person tells me they have a stock pick that’s going
to rise 10-fold in the next year, I will immediately write them
off as full of nonsense.
If someone who’s full of nonsense tells me that a stock I own
is about to collapse because it’s an accounting fraud, I will
clear my calendar and listen to their every word.
Say we’ll have a big recession and newspapers will call you.
Say we’re headed for average growth and no one
particularly cares. Say we’re nearing the next Great
Depression and you’ll get on TV. But mention that good
times are ahead, or markets have room to run, or that a
company has huge potential, and a common reaction from
commentators and spectators alike is that you are either a
salesman or comically aloof of risks.
The investing newsletter industry has known this for years,
and is now populated by prophets of doom despite
operating in an environment where the stock market has
gone up 17,000-fold in the last century (including
dividends).
This is true beyond finance. Matt Ridley wrote in his book
The Rational Optimist:

[PAGE 188]
A constant drumbeat of pessimism usually drowns out any
triumphalist song ... If you say the world has been getting
better you may get away with being called naïve and
insensitive. If you say the world is going to go on getting
better, you are considered embarrassingly mad. If, on the
other hand, you say catastrophe is imminent, you may
expect a McArthur genius award or even the Nobel Peace
Prize. In my own adult lifetime ... the fashionable reasons for
pessimism changed, but the pessimism was constant.
“Every group of people I ask thinks the world is more
frightening, more violent, and more hopeless—in short,
more dramatic—than it really is,” Hans Rosling wrote in his
book Factfulness.
When you realize how much progress humans can make
during a lifetime in everything from economic growth to
medical breakthroughs to stock market gains to social
equality, you would think optimism would gain more
attention than pessimism. And yet.
The intellectual allure of pessimism has been known for
ages. John Stuart Mill wrote in the 1840s: “I have observed
that not the man who hopes when others despair, but the
man who despairs when others hope, is admired by a large
class of persons as a sage.”
The question is, why? And how does it impact how we think
about money?

[PAGE 189]
Let’s repeat the premise that no one is crazy.
There are valid reasons why pessimism is seductive when
dealing with money. It just helps to know what they are to
ensure we don’t take them too far.
Part of it is instinctual and unavoidable. Kahneman says the
asymmetric aversion to loss is an evolutionary shield. He
writes:
When directly compared or weighted against each other,
losses loom larger than gains. This asymmetry between the
power of positive and negative expectations or experiences
has an evolutionary history. Organisms that treat threats as
more urgent than opportunities have a better chance to
survive and reproduce.
But a few other things make financial pessimism easy,
common, and more persuasive than optimism.
One is that money is ubiquitous, so something bad
happening tends to affect everyone and captures
everyone’s attention.
That isn’t true of, say, weather. A hurricane barreling down
on Florida poses no direct risk to 92% of Americans. But a
recession barreling down on the economy could impact
every single person—including you, so pay attention.

[PAGE 190]
This goes for something as specific as the stock market.
More than half of all American households directly own
stocks.⁵⁷ Even among those that don’t, the stock market’s
gyrations are promoted so heavily in the media that the Dow
Jones Industrial Average might be the stock-less household’s
most-watched economic barometer.
Stocks rising 1% might be briefly mentioned in the evening
news. But a 1% fall will be reported in bold, all-caps letters
usually written in blood red. The asymmetry is hard to avoid.
And while few question or try to explain why the market
went up—isn’t it supposed to go up?—there is almost always
an attempt to explain why it went down.
Are investors worried about economic growth?
Did the Fed screw things up again?
Are politicians making bad decisions?
Is there another shoe to drop?
Narratives about why a decline occurred make them easier
to talk about, worry about, and frame a story around what
you think will happen next—usually, more of the same.
Even if you don’t own stocks, those kind of things will grab
your attention. Only 2.5% of Americans owned stocks on the
eve of the great crash of 1929 that sparked the Great
Depression. But the majority of Americans—if not the world
—watched in amazement as the market collapsed,
wondering what it signaled about their own fate. This was
true whether you were a lawyer or a farmer or a car
mechanic.
Historian Eric Rauchway writes:

[PAGE 191]
This fall in value immediately afflicted only a few Americans.
But so closely had the others watched the market and
regarded it as an index of their fates that they suddenly
stopped much of their economic activity. As the economist
Joseph Schumpeter later wrote, “people felt that the ground
under their feet was giving way.”⁵⁸
There are two topics that will affect your life whether you
are interested in them or not: money and health. While
health issues tend to be individual, money issues are more
systemic. In a connected system where one person’s
decisions can affect everyone else, it’s understandable why
financial risks gain a spotlight and capture attention in a
way few other topics can.
Another is that pessimists often extrapolate present
trends without accounting for how markets adapt.
In 2008 environmentalist Lester Brown wrote: “By 2030
China would need 98 million barrels of oil a day. The world is
currently producing 85 million barrels a day and may never
produce much more than that. There go the world’s oil
reserves.”⁵⁹
He’s right. The world would run out of oil in that scenario.
But that’s not how markets work.
There is an iron law in economics: extremely good and
extremely bad circumstances rarely stay that way for long

[PAGE 192]
because supply and demand adapt in hard-to-predict ways.
Consider what happened to oil immediately after Brown’s
prediction.
Oil prices surged in 2008 as growing global demand—much
of it from China—crept up to potential output. A barrel of oil
sold for $20 in 2001 and $138 by 2008.⁶⁰
The new price meant drilling oil was like pulling gold out of
the ground. The incentives for oil producers changed
dramatically. Hard-to-tap oil supplies that weren’t worth the
fight at $20 a barrel—the cost of drilling didn’t offset the
price you could sell it for—became the bonanza of a lifetime
now that you could sell a barrel for $138.
That sparked a surge of new fracking and horizontal drilling
technologies.
The Earth has had roughly the same amount of oil reserves
for all of human history. And we’ve known where the big oil
deposits are for some time. What changes is the technology
we have that lets us economically pull the stuff out of the
ground. Oil historian Daniel Yergin writes: “86% of oil
reserves in the United States are the result not of what is
estimated at time of discovery but of the revisions” that
come when our technology improves.
That’s what happened as fracking took off in 2008. In the
United States alone oil production went from roughly five
million barrels per day in 2008 to 13 million by 2019.⁶¹
World oil production is now over 100 million barrels per day
—some 20% above what Brown assumed was the high
mark.
To a pessimist extrapolating oil trends in 2008, of course
things looked bad. To a realist who understood that

[PAGE 193]
necessity is the mother of all invention, it was far less scary.
Assuming that something ugly will stay ugly is an easy
forecast to make. And it’s persuasive, because it doesn’t
require imagining the world changing. But problems correct
and people adapt. Threats incentivize solutions in equal
magnitude. That’s a common plot of economic history that
is too easily forgotten by pessimists who forecast in straight
lines.
A third is that progress happens too slowly to notice,
but setbacks happen too quickly to ignore.
There are lots of overnight tragedies. There are rarely
overnight miracles.
On January 5th, 1889, the Detroit Free Press pushed back
against the long-held dream that man could one day fly like
a bird. Airplanes, the paper wrote, “appear impossible”:
The smallest possible weight of a flying machine, with the
necessary fuel and engineer, could not be less than 300 or
400 pounds … but there is a low limit of weight, certainly
not much beyond fifty pounds, beyond which it is impossible
for an animal to fly. Nature has reached this limit, and with
her utmost effort has failed to pass it.
Six months later, Orville Wright dropped out of high school
to help his brother, Wilbur, tinker in their backyard shed to

[PAGE 194]
build a printing press. It was the brothers’ first joint
invention. It would not be their last.
If you had to make a list of the most important inventions of
the 20th century, the airplane would be at least top five, if
not number one. The airplane changed everything. It started
world wars, it ended world wars. It connected the world,
bridging gaps between cities and rural communities; oceans
and countries.
But the story of the Wright Brothers’ quest to build the first
plane has a fascinating twist.
After they conquered flight, no one seemed to notice.
Nobody seemed to care.
In his 1952 book on American history, Frederick Lewis Allen
wrote:
Several years went by before the public grasped what the
Wrights were doing; people were so convinced that flying
was impossible that most of those who saw them flying
about Dayton [Ohio] in 1905 decided that what they had
seen must be some trick without significance—somewhat as
most people today would regard a demonstration of, say,
telepathy. It was not until May, 1908—nearly four and a half
years after the Wright’s first flight—that experienced
reporters were sent to observe what they were doing,
experienced editors gave full credence to these reporters’
excited dispatches, and the world at last woke up to the fact
that human flight had been successfully accomplished.

[PAGE 195]
Even after people caught on to the plane’s wonder, they
underestimated it for years.
First it was seen mainly as a military weapon. Then a rich
person’s toy. Then, perhaps, used to transport a few people.
The Washington Post wrote in 1909: “There will never be
such a thing as commercial aerial freighters. Freight will
continue to drag its slow weight across the patient earth.”
The first cargo plane took off five months later.
Now compare that slow, years-long awakening to becoming
optimistic about the airplane to how quickly people pay
attention to drivers of pessimism, like a corporate
bankruptcy.
Or a major war.
Or a plane crash. Some of the first mentions of the Wright’s
plane came in 1908 when an Army Lieutenant named
Thomas Selfridge was killed during a demonstration flight.⁶²
Growth is driven by compounding, which always takes time.
Destruction is driven by single points of failure, which can
happen in seconds, and loss of confidence, which can
happen in an instant.
It’s easier to create a narrative around pessimism because
the story pieces tend to be fresher and more recent.
Optimistic narratives require looking at a long stretch of
history and developments, which people tend to forget and
take more effort to piece together.
Consider the progress of medicine. Looking at the last year
will do you little good. Any single decade won’t do much
better. But looking at the last 50 years will show something
extraordinary. For example, the age-adjusted death rate per

[PAGE 196]
capita from heart disease has declined more than 70% since
1965, according to the National Institute of Health.⁶³ A 70%
decline in heart-disease death is enough to save something
like half a million American lives per year. Picture the
population of Atlanta saved every year. But since that
progress happened so slowly, it captures less attention than
quick, sudden losses like terrorism, plane crashes, or natural
disasters. We could have a Hurricane Katrina five times a
week, every week—imagine how much attention that would
receive—and it would not offset the number of annual lives
saved by the decline in heart disease in the last 50 years.
This same thing applies to business, where it takes years to
realize how important a product or company is, but failures
can happen overnight.
And in stock markets, where a 40% decline that takes place
in six months will draw congressional investigations, but a
140% gain that takes place over six years can go virtually
unnoticed.
And in careers, where reputations take a lifetime to build
and a single email to destroy.
The short sting of pessimism prevails while the powerful pull
of optimism goes unnoticed.
This underscores an important point made previously in this
book: In investing you must identify the price of success—
volatility and loss amid the long backdrop of growth—and
be willing to pay it.
In 2004 The New York Times interviewed Stephen Hawking,
the scientist whose incurable motor-neuron disease left him

[PAGE 197]
paralyzed and unable to talk at age 21.
Through his computer, Hawking told the interviewer how
excited he was to sell books to lay people.
“Are you always this cheerful?” the Times asked.
“My expectations were reduced to zero when I was 21.
Everything since then has been a bonus,” he replied.
Expecting things to be great means a best-case scenario
that feels flat. Pessimism reduces expectations, narrowing
the gap between possible outcomes and outcomes you feel
great about.
Maybe that’s why it’s so seductive. Expecting things to be
bad is the best way to be pleasantly surprised when they’re
not.
Which, ironically, is something to be optimistic about.
Now, a short story about stories.

[PAGE 198]


[PAGE 199]
Imagine an alien dispatched to Earth. His job is to keep tabs
on our economy.
He circles above New York City, trying to size up the
economy and how it changed between 2007 and 2009.
On New Year’s Eve 2007 he hovers over Times Square. He
sees tens of thousands of happy partygoers surrounded by
bright lights, monstrous billboards, fireworks, and TV
cameras.
He comes back to Times Square on New Year’s Eve 2009. He
sees tens of thousands of happy partygoers surrounded by
bright lights, monstrous billboards, fireworks, and TV
cameras.
It looks about the same. He cannot see much difference.
He sees roughly the same number of New Yorkers hustling
around the city. Those people are surrounded by the same
number of office buildings, which house the same number
of desks with the same number of computers, hooked up to
the same number of internet connections.
Outside the city he sees the same number of factories and
warehouses, connected by the same highways, carrying the
same number of trucks.
He gets a little closer to the ground and sees the same
universities teaching the same topics and handing out the
same degrees to the same number of people.
He sees the same number of patents protecting the same
groundbreaking ideas.

[PAGE 200]
He notices that technology has improved. Everyone in 2009
carries smartphones that didn’t exist in 2007. Computers
are now faster. Medicine is better. Cars get better gas
mileage. Solar and fracking technology has advanced. Social
media has grown exponentially.
As he flies around the country he sees the same. Around the
globe, more of the same.
The economy is in about the same shape, maybe even
better, in 2009 as it was in 2007, he concludes.
Then he looks at the numbers.
He’s shocked that U.S. households are $16 trillion poorer in
2009 than they were in 2007.
He’s dumbfounded that 10 million more Americans are
unemployed.
He’s in disbelief when he learns the stock market is worth
half of what it was two years before.
He can’t believe that people’s forecast of their economic
potential has plunged.
“I don’t get it,” he says. “I’ve seen the cities. I’ve looked at
the factories. You guys have the same knowledge, the same
tools, the same ideas. Nothing has changed! Why are you
poorer? Why are you more pessimistic?”
There was one change the alien couldn’t see between 2007
and 2009: The stories we told ourselves about the economy.
In 2007, we told a story about the stability of housing prices,
the prudence of bankers, and the ability of financial markets
to accurately price risk.

[PAGE 201]
In 2009 we stopped believing that story.
That’s the only thing that changed. But it made all the
difference in the world.
Once the narrative that home prices will keep rising broke,
mortgage defaults rose, then banks lost money, then they
reduced lending to other businesses, which led to layoffs,
which led to less spending, which led to more layoffs, and
on and on.
Other than clinging to a new narrative, we had an identical
—if not greater—capacity for wealth and growth in 2009 as
we did in 2007. Yet the economy suffered its worst hit in 80
years.
This is different from, say, Germany in 1945, whose
manufacturing base had been obliterated. Or Japan in the
2000s, whose working-age population was shrinking. That’s
tangible economic damage. In 2009 we inflicted narrative
damage on ourselves, and it was vicious. It’s one of the most
potent economic forces that exists.
When we think about the growth of economies, businesses,
investments and careers, we tend to think about tangible
things—how much stuff do we have and what are we
capable of?
But stories are, by far, the most powerful force in the
economy. They are the fuel that can let the tangible parts of
the economy work, or the brake that holds our capabilities
back.
At the personal level, there are two things to keep in mind
about a story-driven world when managing your money.

[PAGE 202]
1. The more you want something to be true, the
more likely you are to believe a story that
overestimates the odds of it being true.
What was the happiest day of your life?
The documentary How to Live Forever asks that innocent
question to a centenarian who offered an amazing response.
“Armistice Day,” she said, referring to the 1918 agreement
that ended World War I.
“Why?” the producer asks.
“Because we knew there would be no more wars ever
again,” she says.
World War II began 21 years later, killing 75 million people.
There are many things in life that we think are true because
we desperately want them to be true.
I call these things “appealing fictions.” They have a big
impact on how we think about money—particularly
investments and the economy.
An appealing fiction happens when you are smart, you want
to find solutions, but face a combination of limited control
and high stakes.
They are extremely powerful. They can make you believe
just about anything.
Take a short example.

[PAGE 203]
Ali Hajaji’s son was sick. Elders in his Yemeni village
proposed a folk remedy: shove the tip of a burning stick
through his son’s chest to drain the sickness from his body.
After the procedure, Hajaji told The New York Times: “When
you have no money, and your son is sick, you’ll believe
anything.”⁶⁴
Medicine predates useful medicine by thousands of years.
Before the scientific method and the discovery of germs
there was blood-letting, starvation therapy, cutting holes in
your body to let the evils out, and other treatments that did
nothing but hasten your demise.
It seems crazy. But if you desperately need a solution and a
good one isn’t known or readily available to you, the path of
least resistance is toward Hajaji’s reasoning: willing to
believe anything. Not just try anything, but believe it.
Chronicling the Great Plague of London, Daniel Defoe wrote
in 1722:
The people were more addicted to prophecies and
astrological conjurations, dreams, and old wives’ tales than
ever they were before or since … almanacs frighted them
terribly … the posts of houses and corners of streets were
plastered over with doctors’ bills and papers of ignorant
fellows, quacking and inviting the people to come to them
for remedies, which was generally set off with such
flourishes as these: ‘Infallible preventive pills against the
plague.’ ‘Neverfailing preservatives against the infection.’
‘Sovereign cordials against the corruption of the air.’

[PAGE 204]
The plague killed a quarter of Londoners in 18 months. You’ll
believe just about anything when the stakes are that high.
Now think about how the same set of limited information
and high stakes impact our financial decisions.
Why do people listen to TV investment commentary that has
little track record of success? Partly because the stakes are
so high in investing. Get a few stock picks right and you can
become rich without much effort. If there’s a 1% chance
that someone’s prediction will come true, and it coming true
will change your life, it’s not crazy to pay attention—just in
case.
And there are so many financial opinions that once you pick
a strategy or side, you become invested in them both
financially and mentally. If you want a certain stock to rise
10-fold, that’s your tribe. If you think a certain economic
policy will spark hyperinflation, that’s your side.
These may be low-probability bets. The problem is that
viewers can’t, or don’t, calibrate low odds, like a 1% chance.
Many default to a firm belief that what they want to be true
is unequivocally true. But they’re only doing that because
the possibility of a huge outcome exists.
Investing is one of the only fields that offers daily
opportunities for extreme rewards. People believe in
financial quackery in a way they never would for, say,
weather quackery because the rewards for correctly
predicting what the stock market will do next week are in a
different universe than the rewards for predicting whether it
will be sunny or rainy next week.
Consider that 85% of active mutual funds underperformed
their benchmark over the 10 years ending 2018.⁶⁵ That
figure has been fairly stable for generations. You would think

[PAGE 205]
an industry with such poor performance would be a niche
service and have a hard time staying in business. But there’s
almost five trillion dollars invested in these funds.⁶⁶ Give
someone the chance of investing alongside “the next
Warren Buffett” and they’ll believe with such faith that
millions of people will put their life savings behind it.
Or take Bernie Madoff. In hindsight his Ponzi scheme should
have been obvious. He reported returns that never varied,
they were audited by a relatively unknown accounting firm,
and he refused to release much information on how the
returns were achieved. Yet Madoff raised billions of dollars
from some of the most sophisticated investors in the world.
He told a good story, and people wanted to believe it.
This is a big part of why room for error, flexibility, and
financial independence—important themes discussed in
previous chapters—are indispensable.
The bigger the gap between what you want to be true and
what you need to be true to have an acceptable outcome,
the more you are protecting yourself from falling victim to
an appealing financial fiction.
When thinking about room for error in a forecast it is
tempting to think that potential outcomes range from you
being just right enough to you being very, very right. But the
biggest risk is that you want something to be true so badly
that the range of your forecast isn’t even in the same
ballpark as reality.
In its last 2007 meeting the Federal Reserve predicted what
economic growth would be in 2008 and 2009.⁶⁷ Already
weary of a weakening economy, it was not optimistic. It
predicted a range of potential growth—1.6% growth on the
low end, 2.8% on the high end. That was its margin of

[PAGE 206]
safety, its room for error. In reality the economy contracted
by more than 2%, meaning the Fed’s low-end estimate was
off by almost threefold.
It’s hard for a policymaker to predict an outright recession,
because a recession will make their careers complicated. So
even worst-case projections rarely expect anything worse
than just “slow-ish” growth. It’s an appealing fiction, and it’s
easy to believe because expecting anything worse is too
painful to consider.
Policymakers are easy targets for criticism, but all of us do
this to some extent. And we do it in both directions. If you
think a recession is coming and you cash out your stocks in
anticipation, your view of the economy is suddenly going to
be warped by what you want to happen. Every blip, every
anecdote, will look like a sign that doom has arrived—maybe
not because it has, but because you want it to.
Incentives are a powerful motivator, and we should always
remember how they influence our own financial goals and
outlooks. It can’t be overstated: there is no greater force in
finance than room for error, and the higher the stakes, the
wider it should be.
2. Everyone has an incomplete view of the world. But
we form a complete narrative to fill in the gaps.
My daughter is about a year old as I write this. She’s curious
about everything and learns so fast.
But sometimes I think about all the stuff she can’t
comprehend.

[PAGE 207]
She has no idea why her dad goes to work every morning.
The concept of bills, budgets, careers, promotions, and
saving for retirement are completely foreign to her.
Imagine trying to explain the Federal Reserve, credit
derivatives, or NAFTA to her. Impossible.
But her world isn’t dark. She does not wander around in
confusion.
Even at a year old, she’s written her own internal narrative
of how everything works. Blankets keep you warm, mom
snuggles keep you safe, and dates taste good.
Everything she comes across fits into one of a few dozen
mental models she’s learned. When I go to work she doesn’t
stop in confusion, wondering what salary and bills are. She
has a crystal clear explanation of the situation: Dad isn’t
playing with me, and I wanted him to play with me, so I’m
sad.
Even though she knows little, she doesn’t realize it, because
she tells herself a coherent story about what’s going on
based on the little she does know.
All of us, no matter our age, do the same thing.
Just like my daughter, I don’t know what I don’t know. So I
am just as susceptible to explaining the world through the
limited set of mental models I have at my disposal.
Like her, I look for the most understandable causes in
everything I come across. And, like her, I’m wrong about a
lot of them, because I know a lot less about how the world
works than I think I do.

[PAGE 208]
This is true for the most fact-based of subjects.
Take history. It’s just the recounting of stuff that already
happened. It should be clear and objective. But as B. H.
Liddell Hart writes in the book Why Don’t We Learn From
History?:
[History] cannot be interpreted without the aid of
imagination and intuition. The sheer quantity of evidence is
so overwhelming that selection is inevitable. Where there is
selection there is art. Those who read history tend to look for
what proves them right and confirms their personal
opinions. They defend loyalties. They read with a purpose to
affirm or to attack. They resist inconvenient truth since
everyone wants to be on the side of the angels. Just as we
start wars to end all wars.
Daniel Kahneman once told me about the stories people tell
themselves to make sense of the past. He said:
Hindsight, the ability to explain the past, gives us the
illusion that the world is understandable. It gives us the
illusion that the world makes sense, even when it doesn’t
make sense. That’s a big deal in producing mistakes in
many fields.
Most people, when confronted with something they don’t
understand, do not realize they don’t understand it because
they’re able to come up with an explanation that makes
sense based on their own unique perspective and

[PAGE 209]
experiences in the world, however limited those experiences
are. We all want the complicated world we live in to make
sense. So we tell ourselves stories to fill in the gaps of what
are effectively blind spots.
What these stories do to us financially can be both
fascinating and terrifying.
When I’m blind to parts of how the world works I might
completely misunderstand why the stock market is
behaving like it is, in a way that gives me too much
confidence in my ability to know what it might do next. Part
of the reason forecasting the stock market and the economy
is so hard is because you are the only person in the world
who thinks the world operates the way you do. When you
make decisions for reasons that I can’t even comprehend, I
might follow you blindly into a decision that’s right for you
and disastrous to me. This, as we saw in chapter 16, is how
bubbles form.
Coming to terms with how much you don’t know means
coming to terms with how much of what happens in the
world is out of your control. And that can be hard to accept.
Think about market forecasts. We’re very, very bad at them.
I once calculated that if you just assume that the market
goes up every year by its historic average, your accuracy is
better than if you follow the average annual forecasts of the
top 20 market strategists from large Wall Street banks. Our
ability to predict recessions isn’t much better. And since big
events come out of nowhere, forecasts may do more harm
than good, giving the illusion of predictability in a world
where unforeseen events control most outcomes. Carl
Richards writes: “Risk is what’s left over when you think
you’ve thought of everything.”

[PAGE 210]
People know this. I have not met an investor who genuinely
thinks market forecasts as a whole are accurate or useful.
But there’s still tremendous demand for forecasts, in both
the media and from financial advisors.
Why?
Psychologist Philip Tetlock once wrote: “We need to believe
we live in a predictable, controllable world, so we turn to
authoritative-sounding people who promise to satisfy that
need.”
Satisfying that need is a great way to put it. Wanting to
believe we are in control is an emotional itch that needs to
be scratched, rather than an analytical problem to be
calculated and solved. The illusion of control is more
persuasive than the reality of uncertainty. So we cling to
stories about outcomes being in our control.
Part of this has to do with confusing fields of precision with
fields of uncertainty.
NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft passed by Pluto two years
ago. It was a three-billion mile trip that took nine and a half
years. According to NASA, the trip “took about one minute
less than predicted when the craft was launched in January
2006.”⁶⁸
Think about that. In an untested, decade-long journey,
NASA’s forecast was 99.99998% accurate. That’s like
forecasting a trip from New York to Boston and being
accurate to within four millionths of a second.
But astrophysics is a field of precession. It isn’t impacted by
the vagaries of human behavior and emotions, like finance
is. Business, economics, and investing, are fields of
uncertainty, overwhelmingly driven by decisions that can’t

[PAGE 211]
easily be explained with clean formulas, like a trip to Pluto
can. But we desperately want it to be like a trip to Pluto,
because the idea of a NASA engineer being in 99.99998%
control of an outcome is beautiful and comforting. It’s so
comforting that we’re tempted to tell ourselves stories about
how much control we have in other parts of our life, like
money.
Kahneman once laid out the path these stories take:
When planning we focus on what we want to do and can do,
neglecting the plans and skills of others whose decisions
might affect our outcomes.
Both in explaining the past and in predicting the future, we
focus on the causal role of skill and neglect the role of luck.
We focus on what we know and neglect what we do not
know, which makes us overly confident in our beliefs.
He described how this impacts businesses:
I have had several occasions to ask founders and
participants in innovative start-ups a question: To what
extent will the outcome of your effort depend on what you
do in your firm? This is evidently an easy question; the
answer comes quickly and it has never been less than 80%.

[PAGE 212]
Even when they are not sure they will succeed, these bold
people think their fate is almost entirely in their own hands.
They are surely wrong: the outcome of a start-up depends as
much on the achievements of its competitors and on
changes in the market as on its own efforts. However,
entrepreneurs naturally focus on what they know best—their
plans and actions and the most immediate threats and
opportunities, such as the availability of funding. They know
less about their competitors and therefore find it natural to
imagine a future in which the competition plays little part.
We all do this to some extent.
And like my daughter, it doesn’t bother us a bit.
We don’t wander around blind and confused. We have to
think the world we operate in makes sense based on what
we happen to know. It’d be too hard to get out of bed in the
morning if you felt otherwise.
But the alien circling over Earth?
The one who’s confident he knows what’s happening based
on what he sees but turns out to be completely wrong
because he can’t know the stories going on inside everyone
else’s head?
He’s all of us.

[PAGE 213]


[PAGE 214]
Congratulations, you’re still reading.
It’s time to tie together a few things we’ve learned.
This chapter is a bit of a summary; a few short and
actionable lessons that can help you make better financial
decisions.
First, let me tell you a story about a dentist appointment
gone horribly awry. It teaches us something vital about the
dangers of giving advice about what to do with your money.
Clarence Hughes went to the dentist in 1931. His mouth was
radiating pain. His dentist put him under crude anesthesia
to ease the pain. When Clarence awoke hours later he had
16 fewer teeth and his tonsils removed.
And then everything went wrong. Clarence died a week later
from his surgery’s complications.
His wife sued the dentist, but not because the surgery went
awry. Every surgery risked death in 1931.
Clarence, she said, never consented to the procedures in the
first place, and wouldn’t if he were asked.
The case wove through courts, but went nowhere. Consent
between doctor and patient wasn’t black and white in 1931.
One court summed up the idea that doctors require freedom
to make the best medical decisions: “Without such, we
could not enjoy the advancement of science.”
For most of history the ethos of medicine was that the
doctor’s job was to fix the patient, and what the patient

[PAGE 215]
thought about the doctor’s treatment plans wasn’t relevant.
Dr. Jay Katz wrote about the philosophy in his book The
Silent World Between Doctor and Patient:
Doctors felt that in order to accomplish that objective they
were obligated to attend to their patients’ physical and
emotional needs and to do so on their own authority,
without consulting with their patients about the decisions
that needed to be made. The idea that patients may also be
entitled to sharing the burdens of decisions with their
doctors was never part of the ethos of medicine.
This wasn’t ego or malice. It was a belief in two points:
Every patient wants to be cured.
There is a universal and right way to cure them.
Not requiring patient consent in treatment plans makes
sense if you believe in those two points.
But that’s not how medicine works.
In the last 50 years medical schools subtly shifted teaching
away from treating disease and toward treating patients.
That meant laying out the options of treatment plans, and
then letting the patient decide the best path forward.

[PAGE 216]
This trend was partly driven by patient-protection laws,
partly by Katz’s influential book, which argued that patients
have wildly different views about what’s worth it in
medicine, so their beliefs have to be taken into
consideration. Katz wrote:
It is dangerous nonsense to assert that in the practice of
their art and science physicians can rely on their benevolent
intentions, their abilities to judge what is the right thing to
do ... It is not that easy. Medicine is a complex profession
and the interactions between physicians and patients are
also complex.
That last line is important. “Medicine is a complex profession
and the interactions between physicians and patients are
also complex.”
You know what profession is the same? Financial advice.
I can’t tell you what to do with your money, because I don’t
know you.
I don’t know what you want. I don’t know when you want it.
I don’t know why you want it.
So I’m not going to tell you what to do with your money. I
don’t want to treat you like a dentist treated Clarence
Hughes.
But doctors and dentists aren’t useless, obviously. They have
knowledge. They know the odds. They know what tends to
work, even if patients come to different conclusions about
what kind of treatment is right for them.

[PAGE 217]
Financial advisors are the same. There are universal truths in
money, even if people come to different conclusions about
how they want to apply those truths to their own finances.
With that caveat in place, let’s look at a few short
recommendations that can help you make better decisions
with your money.
Go out of your way to find humility when things are
going right and forgiveness/compassion when they
go wrong. Because it’s never as good or as bad as it
looks. The world is big and complex. Luck and risk
are both real and hard to identify. Do so when
judging both yourself and others. Respect the power
of luck and risk and you’ll have a better chance of
focusing on things you can actually control. You’ll
also have a better chance of finding the right role
models.
Less ego, more wealth. Saving money is the gap
between your ego and your income, and wealth is
what you don’t see. So wealth is created by
suppressing what you could buy today in order to
have more stuff or more options in the future. No
matter how much you earn, you will never build
wealth unless you can put a lid on how much fun you
can have with your money right now, today.
Manage your money in a way that helps you sleep at
night. That’s different from saying you should aim to
earn the highest returns or save a specific
percentage of your income. Some people won’t sleep
well unless they’re earning the highest returns;
others will only get a good rest if they’re

[PAGE 218]
conservatively invested. To each their own. But the
foundation of, “does this help me sleep at night?” is
the best universal guidepost for all financial
decisions.
If you want to do better as an investor, the single
most powerful thing you can do is increase your time
horizon. Time is the most powerful force in
investing. It makes little things grow big and big
mistakes fade away. It can’t neutralize luck and risk,
but it pushes results closer towards what people
deserve.
Become OK with a lot of things going wrong. You can
be wrong half the time and still make a fortune,
because a small minority of things account for the
majority of outcomes. No matter what you’re doing
with your money you should be comfortable with a
lot of stuff not working. That’s just how the world is.
So you should always measure how you’ve done by
looking at your full portfolio, rather than individual
investments. It is fine to have a large chunk of poor
investments and a few outstanding ones. That’s
usually the best-case scenario. Judging how you’ve
done by focusing on individual investments makes
winners look more brilliant than they were, and
losers appear more regrettable than they should.
Use money to gain control over your time, because
not having control of your time is such a powerful
and universal drag on happiness. The ability to do
what you want, when you want, with who you want,
for as long as you want to, pays the highest dividend
that exists in finance.

[PAGE 219]
Be nicer and less flashy. No one is impressed with
your possessions as much as you are. You might
think you want a fancy car or a nice watch. But what
you probably want is respect and admiration. And
you’re more likely to gain those things through
kindness and humility than horsepower and chrome.
Save. Just save. You don’t need a specific reason to
save. It’s great to save for a car, or a downpayment,
or a medical emergency. But saving for things that
are impossible to predict or define is one of the best
reasons to save. Everyone’s life is a continuous
chain of surprises. Savings that aren’t earmarked for
anything in particular is a hedge against life’s
inevitable ability to surprise the hell out of you at
the worst possible moment.
Define the cost of success and be ready to pay it.
Because nothing worthwhile is free. And remember
that most financial costs don’t have visible price
tags. Uncertainty, doubt, and regret are common
costs in the finance world. They’re often worth
paying. But you have to view them as fees (a price
worth paying to get something nice in exchange)
rather than fines (a penalty you should avoid).
Worship room for error. A gap between what could
happen in the future and what you need to happen in
the future in order to do well is what gives you
endurance, and endurance is what makes
compounding magic over time. Room for error often
looks like a conservative hedge, but if it keeps you in
the game it can pay for itself many times over.
Avoid the extreme ends of financial decisions.
Everyone’s goals and desires will change over time,

[PAGE 220]
and the more extreme your past decisions were the
more you may regret them as you evolve.
You should like risk because it pays off over time. But
you should be paranoid of ruinous risk because it
prevents you from taking future risks that will pay
off over time.
Define the game you’re playing, and make sure your
actions are not being influenced by people playing a
different game.
Respect the mess. Smart, informed, and reasonable
people can disagree in finance, because people have
vastly different goals and desires. There is no single
right answer; just the answer that works for you.
Now let me tell you what works for me.

[PAGE 221]


[PAGE 222]
Sandy Gottesman, a billionaire investor who founded the
consulting group First Manhattan, is said to ask one question
when interviewing candidates for his investment team:
“What do you own, and why?”
Not, “What stocks do you think are cheap?” or “What
economy is about to have a recession?”
Just show me what you do with your own money.
I love this question because it highlights what can often be a
mile-wide gap between what makes sense—which is what
people suggest you do—and what feels right to them—
which is what they actually do.
Half of all U.S. mutual fund portfolio managers do not invest
a cent of their own money in their funds, according to
Morningstar.⁶⁹ This might seem atrocious, and surely the
statistic uncovers some hypocrisy.
But this kind of stuff is more common than you’d think. Ken
Murray, a professor of medicine at USC, wrote an essay in
2011 titled “How Doctors Die” that showed the degree to
which doctors choose different end-of-life treatments for
themselves than they recommend for their patients.⁷⁰
“[Doctors] don’t die like the rest of us,” he wrote. “What’s
unusual about them is not how much treatment they get
compared to most Americans, but how little. For all the time
they spend fending off the deaths of others, they tend to be
fairly serene when faced with death themselves. They know
exactly what is going to happen, they know the choices, and
they generally have access to any sort of medical care they

[PAGE 223]
could want. But they go gently.” A doctor may throw the
kitchen sink at her patient’s cancer, but choose palliative
care for herself.
The difference between what someone suggests you do and
what they do for themselves isn’t always a bad thing. It just
underscores that when dealing with complicated and
emotional issues that affect you and your family, there is no
one right answer. There is no universal truth. There’s only
what works for you and your family, checking the boxes you
want checked in a way that leaves you comfortable and
sleeping well at night.
There are basic principles that must be adhered to—this is
true in finance and in medicine—but important financial
decisions are not made in spreadsheets or in textbooks.
They are made at the dinner table. They often aren’t made
with the intention of maximizing returns, but minimizing
the chance of disappointing a spouse or child. Those kinds
of things are difficult to summarize in charts or formulas,
and they vary widely from person to person. What works for
one person may not work for another.
You have to find what works for you. Here’s what works for
me.
How my family thinks about savings
Charlie Munger once said “I did not intend to get rich. I just
wanted to get independent.”
We can leave aside rich, but independence has always been
my personal financial goal. Chasing the highest returns or

[PAGE 224]
leveraging my assets to live the most luxurious life has little
interest to me. Both look like games people do to impress
their friends, and both have hidden risks. I mostly just want
to wake up every day knowing my family and I can do
whatever we want to do on our own terms. Every financial
decision we make revolves around that goal.
My parents lived their adult years in two stages: dirt poor
and moderately well off. My father became a doctor when he
was 40 and already had three kids. Earning a doctor’s salary
did not offset the frugal mentality that is forced when
supporting three hungry kids while in medical school, and
my parents spent the good years living well below their
means with a high savings rate. This gave them a degree of
independence. My father was an Emergency Room doctor,
one of the highest-stress professions I can imagine and one
that requires a painful toggling of circadian rhythms
between night and day shifts. After two decades he decided
he’d had enough, so he stopped. Just quit. Moved onto the
next phase of his life.
That stuck with me. Being able to wake up one morning and
change what you’re doing, on your own terms, whenever
you’re ready, seems like the grandmother of all financial
goals. Independence, to me, doesn’t mean you’ll stop
working. It means you only do the work you like with people
you like at the times you want for as long as you want.
And achieving some level of independence does not rely on
earning a doctor’s income. It’s mostly a matter of keeping
your expectations in check and living below your means.
Independence, at any income level, is driven by your savings
rate. And past a certain level of income your savings rate is
driven by your ability to keep your lifestyle expectations
from running away.

[PAGE 225]
My wife and I met in college and moved in with each other
years before we got married. After school we both had entry-
level jobs with entry-level pay, and settled into a moderate
lifestyle. All lifestyles exist on a spectrum, and what is
decent to one person can feel like royalty or poverty to
another. But at our incomes we got what we considered a
decent apartment, a decent car, decent clothes, decent
food. Comfortable, but nothing close to fancy.
Despite more than a decade of rising incomes—myself in
finance, my wife in health care—we’ve more or less stayed
at that lifestyle ever since. That’s pushed our savings rate
continuously higher. Virtually every dollar of raise has
accrued to savings—our “independence fund.” We now live
considerably below our means, which tells you little about
our income and more about our decision to maintain a
lifestyle that we established in our 20s.
If there’s a part of our household financial plan I’m proud of
it’s that we got the goalpost of lifestyle desires to stop
moving at a young age. Our savings rate is fairly high, but
we rarely feel like we’re repressively frugal because our
aspirations for more stuff haven’t moved much. It’s not that
our aspirations are nonexistent—we like nice stuff and live
comfortably. We just got the goalpost to stop moving.
This would not work for everyone, and it only works for us
because we both agree to it equally—neither of us are
compromising for the other. Most of what we get pleasure
from—going for walks, reading, podcasts—costs little, so we
rarely feel like we’re missing out. On the rare occasion when
I question our savings rate I think of the independence my
parents earned from years of high savings, and I quickly
come back. Independence is our top goal. A secondary
benefit of maintaining a lifestyle below what you can afford
is avoiding the psychological treadmill of keeping up with

[PAGE 226]
the Joneses. Comfortably living below what you can afford,
without much desire for more, removes a tremendous
amount of social pressure that many people in the modern
first world subject themselves to. Nassim Taleb explained:
“True success is exiting some rat race to modulate one’s
activities for peace of mind.” I like that.
We’re so far committed to the independence camp that
we’ve done things that make little sense on paper. We own
our house without a mortgage, which is the worst financial
decision we’ve ever made but the best money decision
we’ve ever made. Mortgage interest rates were absurdly low
when we bought our house. Any rational advisor would
recommend taking advantage of cheap money and
investing extra savings in higher-return assets, like stocks.
But our goal isn’t to be coldly rational; just psychologically
reasonable.
The independent feeling I get from owning our house
outright far exceeds the known financial gain I’d get from
leveraging our assets with a cheap mortgage. Eliminating
the monthly payment feels better than maximizing the long-
term value of our assets. It makes me feel independent.
I don’t try to defend this decision to those pointing out its
flaws, or those who would never do the same. On paper it’s
defenseless. But it works for us. We like it. That’s what
matters. Good decisions aren’t always rational. At some
point you have to choose between being happy or being
“right.”
We also keep a higher percentage of our assets in cash than
most financial advisors would recommend—something
around 20% of our assets outside the value of our house.
This is also close to indefensible on paper, and I’m not
recommending it to others. It’s just what works for us.

[PAGE 227]
We do it because cash is the oxygen of independence, and—
more importantly—we never want to be forced to sell the
stocks we own. We want the probability of facing a huge
expense and needing to liquidate stocks to cover it to be as
close to zero as possible. Perhaps we just have a lower risk
tolerance than others.
But everything I’ve learned about personal finance tells me
that everyone—without exception—will eventually face a
huge expense they did not expect—and they don’t plan for
these expenses specifically because they did not expect
them. The few people who know the details of our finances
ask, “What are you saving for? A house? A boat? A new car?”
No, none of those. I’m saving for a world where curveballs
are more common than we expect. Not being forced to sell
stocks to cover an expense also means we’re increasing the
odds of letting the stocks we own compound for the longest
period of time. Charlie Munger put it well: “The first rule of
compounding is to never interrupt it unnecessarily.”
How my family thinks about investing
I started my career as a stock picker. At the time we only
owned individual stocks, mostly large companies like
Berkshire Hathaway and Procter & Gamble, mixed with
smaller stocks I considered deep value investments. Go back
to my 20s and at any given point I held something like 25
individual stocks.
I don’t know how I did as a stock picker. Did I beat the
market? I’m not sure. Like most who try, I didn’t keep a good
score. Either way, I’ve shifted my views and now every stock
we own is a low-cost index fund.

[PAGE 228]
I don’t have anything against actively picking stocks, either
on your own or through giving your money to an active fund
manager. I think some people can outperform the market
averages—it’s just very hard, and harder than most people
think.
If I had to summarize my views on investing, it’s this: Every
investor should pick a strategy that has the highest odds of
successfully meeting their goals. And I think for most
investors, dollar-cost averaging into a low-cost index fund
will provide the highest odds of long-term success.
That doesn’t mean index investing will always work. It
doesn’t mean it’s for everyone. And it doesn’t mean active
stock picking is doomed to fail. In general, this industry has
become too entrenched on one side or the other—
particularly those vehemently against active investing.
Beating the market should be hard; the odds of success
should be low. If they weren’t, everyone would do it, and if
everyone did it there would be no opportunity. So no one
should be surprised that the majority of those trying to beat
the market fail to do so. (The statistics show 85% of large-
cap active managers didn’t beat the S&P 500 over the
decade ending 2019.)⁷¹
I know people who think it’s insane to try to beat the market
but encourage their kids to reach for the stars and try to
become professional athletes. To each their own. Life is
about playing the odds, and we all think about odds a little
differently.
Over the years I came around to the view that we’ll have a
high chance of meeting all of our family’s financial goals if
we consistently invest money into a low-cost index fund for
decades on end, leaving the money alone to compound. A

[PAGE 229]
lot of this view comes from our lifestyle of frugal spending. If
you can meet all your goals without having to take the
added risk that comes from trying to outperform the market,
then what’s the point of even trying? I can afford to not be
the greatest investor in the world, but I can’t afford to be a
bad one. When I think of it that way, the choice to buy the
index and hold on is a no-brainer for us. I know not everyone
will agree with that logic, especially my friends whose job it
is to beat the market. I respect what they do. But this is
what works for us.
We invest money from every paycheck into these index
funds—a combination of U.S. and international stocks.
There’s no set goal—it’s just whatever is leftover after we
spend. We max out retirement accounts in the same funds,
and contribute to our kids’ 529 college savings plans.
And that’s about it. Effectively all of our net worth is a
house, a checking account, and some Vanguard index funds.
It doesn’t need to be more complicated than that for us. I
like it simple. One of my deeply held investing beliefs is that
there is little correlation between investment effort and
investment results. The reason is because the world is
driven by tails—a few variables account for the majority of
returns. No matter how hard you try at investing you won’t
do well if you miss the two or three things that move the
needle in your strategy. The reverse is true. Simple
investment strategies can work great as long as they
capture the few things that are important to that strategy’s
success. My investing strategy doesn’t rely on picking the
right sector, or timing the next recession. It relies on a high
savings rate, patience, and optimism that the global
economy will create value over the next several decades. I
spend virtually all of my investing effort thinking about

[PAGE 230]
those three things—especially the first two, which I can
control.
I’ve changed my investment strategy in the past. So of
course there’s a chance I’ll change it in the future.
No matter how we save or invest I’m sure we’ll always have
the goal of independence, and we’ll always do whatever
maximizes for sleeping well at night.
We think it’s the ultimate goal; the mastery of the
psychology of money.
But to each their own. No one is crazy.

[PAGE 231]
To understand the psychology of the modern consumer and to grasp where they might be
heading next, you have to know how they got here.
How we all got here.
If you fell asleep in 1945 and woke up in 2020 you would not recognize the world around
you.
The amount of economic growth that took place during that period is virtually
unprecedented. If you saw the level of wealth in New York and San Francisco, you’d be
shocked. If you compared it to the poverty of Detroit, you’d be shocked. If you saw the price
of homes, college tuition, and health care, you’d be shocked. If you saw how average
Americans think about savings and spending in general, you’d be shocked. And if you tried
to think of a reasonable narrative of how it all happened, my guess is you’d be totally
wrong. Because it isn’t intuitive, and it wasn’t foreseeable.
What happened in America since the end of World War II is the story of the American
consumer. It’s a story that helps explain why people think about money the way they do
today.
The short story is this: Things were very uncertain, then they were very good, then pretty
bad, then really good, then really bad, and now here we are. And there is, I think, a
narrative that links all those events together. Not a detailed account. But a story of how
things fit together.
Since this is an attempt to link the big events together, it leaves out many details of what
happened during this period. I’m likely to agree with anyone who points out what I’ve
missed. The goal here is not to describe every play; it’s to look at how one game influenced
the next.
Here’s how the modern consumer got here.

[PAGE 232]
1. August, 1945. World War II ends.
Japan surrendering was “The Happiest Day in American History,” The New York Times wrote.
But there’s the saying, “History is just one damn thing after another.”
The joy of the war ending was quickly met with the question, “What happens now?”
Sixteen million Americans—11% of the population—served in the war. About eight million
were overseas at the end. Their average age was 23. Within 18 months all but 1.5 million of
them would be home and out of uniform.
And then what?
What were they going to do next?
Where were they going to work?
Where were they going to live?
Those were the most important questions of the day, for two reasons. One, no one knew the
answers. Two, if they couldn’t be answered quickly, the most likely scenario—in the eyes of
many economists—was that the economy would slip back into the depths of the Great
Depression.
Three forces had built up during the war:
Housing construction ground to a halt, as virtually all production capacity was shifted to
building war supplies. Fewer than 12,000 homes per month were built in 1943, equivalent
to less than one new home per American city. Returning soldiers faced a severe housing
shortage.
The specific jobs created during the war—building ships, tanks, and planes—were very
suddenly not necessary after it, stopping with a speed and magnitude rarely seen in private
business. It was unclear where soldiers could work.
The marriage rate spiked during and immediately after the war. Soldiers didn’t want to
return to their mother’s basement. They wanted to start a family, in their own home, with a
good job, right away.
This worried policymakers, especially since the Great Depression was still a recent memory,
having ended just five years prior.
In 1946 the Council of Economic Advisors delivered a report to President Truman warning of
“a full-scale depression some time in the next one to four years.”

[PAGE 233]
They wrote in a separate 1947 memo, summarizing a meeting with Truman:
We might be in some sort of recession period where we should have to be very sure of our
ground as to whether recessionary forces might be in danger of getting out of hand …
There is a substantial prospect which should not be overlooked that a further decline may
increase the danger of a downward spiral into depression conditions.
This fear was exacerbated by the fact that exports couldn’t be immediately relied upon for
growth, as two of the largest economies—Europe and Japan—sat in ruins dealing with
humanitarian crises. And America itself was buried in more debt than ever before, limiting
direct government stimulus.
So we did something about it.
2. Low interest rates and the intentional birth of the American consumer.
The first thing we did to keep the economy afloat after the war was keep interest rates low.
This wasn’t an easy decision, because when soldiers came home to a shortage of
everything from clothes to cars it temporarily sent inflation into double digits.
The Federal Reserve was not politically independent before 1951.⁷² The president and the
Fed could coordinate policy. In 1942 the Fed announced it would keep short-term rates at
0.38% to help finance the war. Rates didn’t budge a single basis point for the next seven
years. Three-month Treasury yields stayed below 2% until the mid-1950s.
The explicit reason for keeping rates down was to keep the cost of financing the equivalent
of the $6 trillion we spent on the war low.
But low rates also did something else for all the returning GIs. It made borrowing to buy
homes, cars, gadgets, and toys really cheap.
Which, from a paranoid policymaker’s perspective, was great. Consumption became an
explicit economic strategy in the years after World War II.
An era of encouraging thrift and saving to fund the war quickly turned into an era of
actively promoting spending. Princeton historian Sheldon Garon writes:
After 1945, America again diverged from patterns of savings promotion in Europe and East
Asia … Politicians, businessmen and labor leaders all encouraged Americans to spend to
foster economic growth.⁷³
Two things fueled this push.
One was the GI Bill, which offered unprecedented mortgage opportunities. Sixteen million
veterans could buy a home often with no money down, no interest in the first year, and
fixed rates so low that monthly mortgage payments could be lower than a rental.

[PAGE 234]
The second was an explosion of consumer credit, enabled by the loosening of Depression-
era regulations. The first credit card was introduced in 1950. Store credit, installment
credit, personal loans, payday loans—everything took off. And interest on all debt, including
credit cards, was tax deductible at the time.
It tasted delicious. So we ate a lot of it. A simple story in a simple table:
Household debt in the 1950s grew 1.5 times faster than it did during the 2000s debt
splurge.
3. Pent-up demand for stuff fed by a credit boom and a hidden 1930s
productivity boom led to an economic boom.
The 1930s were the hardest economic decade in American history. But there was a silver
lining that took two decades to notice: By necessity, the Great Depression had
supercharged resourcefulness, productivity, and innovation.
We didn’t pay that much attention to the productivity boom in the ’30s, because everyone
was focused on how bad the economy was. We didn’t pay attention to it in the ’40s,
because everyone was focused on the war.
Then the 1950s came around and we suddenly realized, “Wow, we have some amazing
new inventions. And we’re really good at making them.”
Appliances, cars, phones, air conditioning, electricity.
It was nearly impossible to buy many household goods during the war, because factories
were converted to make guns and ships. That created pent-up demand from GIs for stuff

[PAGE 235]
after the war ended. Married, eager to get on with life, and emboldened with new cheap
consumer credit, they went on a buying spree like the country had never seen.
Frederick Lewis Allen writes in his book The Big Change:
During these postwar years the farmer bought a new tractor, a corn picker, an electric
milking machine; in fact he and his neighbors, between them, assembled a formidable
array of farm machinery for their joint use. The farmer’s wife got the shining white electric
refrigerator she had always longed for and never during the Great Depression had been
able to afford, and an up-to-date washing machine, and a deep-freeze unit. The suburban
family installed a dishwashing machine and invested in a power lawnmower. The city
family became customers of a laundromat and acquired a television set for the living room.
The husband’s office was air-conditioned. And so on endlessly.
It’s hard to overstate how big this surge was.
Commercial car and truck manufacturing virtually ceased from 1942 to 1945. Then 21
million cars were sold from 1945 to 1949. Another 37 million were sold by 1955.
Just under two million homes were built from 1940 to 1945. Then seven million were built
from 1945 to 1950. Another eight million were built by 1955.
Pent-up demand for stuff, and our newfound ability to make stuff, created the jobs that put
returning GIs back to work. And they were good jobs, too. Mix that with consumer credit,
and America’s capacity for spending exploded.
The Federal Reserve wrote to President Truman in 1951: “By 1950, total consumer
expenditures, together with residential construction, amounted to about 203 billion dollars,
or in the neighborhood of 40 percent above the 1944 level.”⁷⁴
The answer to the question, “What are all these GIs going to do after the war?” was now
obvious. They were going to buy stuff, with money earned from their jobs making new stuff,
helped by cheap borrowed money to buy even more stuff.
4. Gains are shared more equally than ever before.
The defining characteristic of economics in the 1950s is that the country got rich by
making the poor less poor.
Average wages doubled from 1940 to 1948, then doubled again by 1963.
And those gains focused on those who had been left behind for decades before. The gap
between rich and poor narrowed by an extraordinary amount.
Lewis Allen wrote in 1955:
The enormous lead of the well-to-do in the economic race has been considerably reduced.

[PAGE 236]
It is the industrial workers who as a group have done best—people such as a steelworker’s
family who used to live on $2,500 and now are getting $4,500, or the highly skilled
machine-tool operator’s family who used to have $3,000 and now can spend an annual
$5,500 or more.
As for the top one percent, the really well-to-do and the rich, whom we might classify very
roughly indeed as the $16,000-and-over group, their share of the total national income,
after taxes, had come down by 1945 from 13 percent to 7 percent.
This was not a short-term trend. Real income for the bottom 20% of wage-earners grew by
a nearly identical amount as the top 5% from 1950 to 1980.
The equality went beyond wages.
Women held jobs outside the home in record numbers. Their labor force participation rate
went from 31% after the war to 37% by 1955, and to 40% by 1965.
Minorities gained, too. After the 1945 inauguration Eleanor Roosevelt wrote about an
African American reporter who told her:
Do you realize what twelve years have done? If at the 1933 reception a number of colored
people had gone down the line and mixed with everyone else in the way they did today,
every paper in the country would have reported it. We do not even think it is news and none
of us will mention it.
Women and minority rights were still a fraction of what they are today. But the progress
toward equality in the late ’40s and ’50s was extraordinary.
The leveling out of classes meant a leveling out of lifestyles. Normal people drove Chevys.
Rich people drove Cadillacs. TV and radio equalized the entertainment and culture people
enjoyed regardless of class. Mail-order catalogs equalized the clothes people wore and the
goods they bought regardless of where they lived. Harper’s Magazine noted in 1957:
The rich man smokes the same sort of cigarettes as the poor man, shaves with the same
sort of razor, uses the same sort of telephone, vacuum cleaner, radio, and TV set, has the
same sort of lighting and heating equipment in his house, and so on indefinitely. The
differences between his automobile and the poor man’s are minor. Essentially they have
similar engines, similar fittings. In the early years of the century there was a hierarchy of
automobiles.
Paul Graham wrote in 2016 about what something as simple as there only being three TV
stations did to equalize culture:
It’s difficult to imagine now, but every night tens of millions of families would sit down
together in front of their TV set watching the same show, at the same time, as their next

[PAGE 237]
door neighbors. What happens now with the Super Bowl used to happen every night. We
were literally in sync.⁷⁵
This was important. People measure their well-being against their peers. And for most of
the 1945–1980 period, people had a lot of what looked like peers to compare themselves
to. Many people—most people—lived lives that were either equal or at least fathomable to
those around them. The idea that people’s lives equalized as much as their incomes is an
important point of this story we’ll come back to.
5. Debt rose tremendously. But so did incomes, so the impact wasn’t a big deal.
Household debt increased fivefold from 1947 to 1957 due to the combination of the new
consumption culture, new debt products, and interest rates subsidized by government
programs, and held low by the Federal Reserve.
But income growth was so strong during this period that the impact on households wasn’t
severe. And household debt was so low to begin with after the war. The Great Depression
wiped out a lot of it, and household spending was so curtailed during the war that debt
accumulation was restricted. So the growth in household debt-to-income from 1947–1957
was manageable.
Household debt-to-income today is just over 100%. Even after rising in the 1950s, 1960s,
and 1970s, it stayed below 60%.
Driving a lot of this debt boom was a surge in home ownership.
The homeownership rate in 1900 was 47%. It stayed right about there for the next four
decades. Then it took off, hitting 53% by 1945 and 62% by 1970. A substantial portion of
the population was now using debt that previous generations would not—could not—have
accessed. And they were mostly OK with it.
David Halberstam writes in his book The Fifties:
They were confident in themselves and their futures in a way that [those] growing up in
harder times found striking. They did not fear debt as their parents had … They differed
from their parents not just in how much they made and what they owned but in their belief
that the future had already arrived. As the first homeowners in their families, they brought
a new excitement and pride with them to the store as they bought furniture or appliances—
in other times young couples might have exhibited such feelings as they bought clothes for
their first baby. It was as if the very accomplishment of owning a home reflected such an
immense breakthrough that nothing was too good to buy for it.
Now’s a good time to connect a few things, as they’ll become increasingly important:
America is booming.

[PAGE 238]
It’s booming together like never before.
It’s booming with debt that isn’t a big deal at the time because it’s still low relative to
income and there’s a cultural acceptance that debt isn’t a scary thing.
6. Things start cracking.
1973 was the first year where it became clear the economy was walking down a new path.
The recession that began that year brought unemployment to the highest it had been since
the 1930s.
Inflation surged. But unlike the post-war spikes, it stayed high.
Short-term interest rates hit 8% in 1973, up from 2.5% a decade earlier.
And you have to put all of that in the context of how much fear there was between
Vietnam, riots, and the assassinations of Martin Luther King, and John and Bobby Kennedy.
It got bleak.
America dominated the world economy in the two decades after the war. Many of the
largest countries had their manufacturing capacity bombed into rubble. But as the 1970s
emerged, that changed. Japan was booming. China’s economy was opening up. The Middle
East was flexing its oil muscles.
A combination of lucky economic advantages and a culture shared by the Greatest
Generation—hardened by the Depression and anchored in systematic cooperation from the
war—shifted when Baby Boomers began coming of age. A new generation that had a
different view of what’s normal hit at the same time a lot of the economic tailwinds of the
previous two decades ended.
Everything in finance is data within the context of expectations. One of the biggest shifts of
the last century happened when the economic winds began blowing in a different, uneven
direction, but people’s expectations were still rooted in a post-war culture of equality. Not
necessarily equality of income, although there was that. But equality in lifestyle and
consumption expectations; the idea that someone earning a 50th percentile income
shouldn’t live a life dramatically different than someone in the 80th or 90th percentile. And
that someone in the 99th percentile lived a better life, but still a life that someone in the
50th percentile could comprehend. That’s how America worked for most of the 1945–1980
period. It doesn’t matter whether you think that’s morally right or wrong. It just matters
that it happened.
Expectations always move slower than facts. And the economic facts of the years between
the early 1970s through the early 2000s were that growth continued, but became more
uneven, yet people’s expectations of how their lifestyle should compare to their peers did
not change.

[PAGE 239]
7. The boom resumes, but it’s different than before.
Ronald Reagan’s 1984 “Morning in America” ad declared:
It’s morning again in America. Today more men and women will go to work than ever
before in our country’s history. With interest rates at about half the record highs of 1980,
nearly 2,000 families today will buy new homes, more than at any time in the past four
years. This afternoon 6,500 young men and women will be married, and with inflation at
less than half of what it was just four years ago, they can look forward with confidence to
the future.
That wasn’t hyperbole. GDP growth was the highest it had been since the 1950s. By 1989
there were six million fewer unemployed Americans than there were seven years before.
The S&P 500 rose almost fourfold between 1982 and 1990. Total real GDP growth in the
1990s was roughly equal to that of the 1950s—40% vs. 42%.
President Clinton boasted in his 2000 State of the Union speech:
We begin the new century with over 20 million new jobs; the fastest economic growth in
more than 30 years; the lowest unemployment rates in 30 years; the lowest poverty rates in
20 years; the lowest African-American and Hispanic unemployment rates on record; the
first back-to-back surpluses in 42 years; and next month, America will achieve the longest
period of economic growth in our entire history. We have built a new economy.
His last sentence was important. It was a new economy. The biggest difference between the
economy of the 1945–1973 period and that of the 1982–2000 period was that the same
amount of growth found its way into totally different pockets.
You’ve probably heard these numbers but they’re worth rehashing. The Atlantic writes:
Between 1993 and 2012, the top 1 percent saw their incomes grow 86.1 percent, while the
bottom 99 percent saw just 6.6 percent growth.
Joseph Stiglitz in 2011:
While the top 1 percent have seen their incomes rise 18 percent over the past decade,
those in the middle have actually seen their incomes fall. For men with only high-school
degrees, the decline has been precipitous—12 percent in the last quarter-century alone.
It was nearly the opposite of the flattening that occurred after the war.

[PAGE 240]
Why this happened is one of the nastiest debates in economics, topped only by the debate
over what we should do about it. Lucky for the purpose of this discussion, neither matters.
All that matters is that sharp inequality became a force over the last 35 years, and it
happened during a period where, culturally, Americans held onto two ideas rooted in the
post-WW2 economy: That you should live a lifestyle similar to most other Americans, and
that taking on debt to finance that lifestyle is acceptable.
8. The big stretch.
Rising incomes among a small group of Americans led to that group breaking away in
lifestyle.
They bought bigger homes, nicer cars, went to expensive schools, and took fancy vacations.
And everyone else was watching—fueled by Madison Avenue in the ’80s and ’90s, and the
internet after that.
The lifestyles of a small portion of legitimately rich Americans inflated the aspirations of the
majority of Americans, whose incomes weren’t rising.
A culture of equality and togetherness that came out of the 1950s–1970s innocently
morphs into a Keeping Up With The Joneses effect.
Now you can see the problem.
Joe, an investment banker making $900,000 a year, buys a 4,000 square foot house with
two Mercedes and sends three of his kids to Pepperdine. He can afford it.
Peter, a bank branch manager making $80,000 a year, sees Joe and feels a subconscious
sense of entitlement to live a similar lifestyle, because Peter’s parents believed—and
instilled in him—that Americans’ lifestyles weren’t that different even if they had different
jobs. His parents were right during their era, because incomes fell into a tight distribution.
But that was then. Peter lives in a different world. But his expectations haven’t changed
much from his parents’, even if the facts have.
So what does Peter do?
He takes out a huge mortgage. He has $45,000 of credit card debt. He leases two cars. His
kids will graduate with heavy student loans. He can’t afford the stuff Joe can, but he’s
pushed to stretch for the same lifestyle. It is a big stretch.
This would have seemed preposterous to someone in the 1930s. But we’ve spent 75 years
since the end of the war fostering a cultural acceptance of household debt.
During a time when median wages were flat, the median new American home grew 50%
larger.

[PAGE 241]
The average new American home now has more bathrooms than occupants. Nearly half
have four or more bedrooms, up from 18% in 1983.
The average car loan adjusted for inflation more than doubled between 1975 and 2003,
from $12,300 to $27,900.
And you know what happened to college costs and student loans.
Household debt-to-income stayed about flat from 1963 to 1973. Then it climbed, and
climbed, and climbed, from around 60% in 1973 to more than 130% by 2007.
Even as interest rates plunged from the early 1980s through 2020, the percentage of
income going to debt service payments rose. And it skewed toward lower-income groups.
The share of income going toward debt and lease payments is just over 8% for the highest
income groups—those with the biggest income gains—but over 21% for those below the
50th percentile.
The difference between this climbing debt and the debt increase that took place during the
1950s and ’60s is that the recent jump started from a high base.
Economist Hyman Minsky described the beginning of debt crises: The moment when
people take on more debt than they can service. It’s an ugly, painful moment. It’s like Wile
E. Coyote looking down, realizing he’s screwed, and falling precipitously.
Which, of course, is what happened in 2008.
9. Once a paradigm is in place it is very hard to turn it around.
A lot of debt was shed after 2008. And then interest rates plunged. Household debt
payments as a percentage of income are now at the lowest levels in 35 years.

[PAGE 242]
But the response to 2008, necessary as it may have been, perpetuated some of the trends
that got us here.
Quantitative easing both prevented economic collapse and boosted asset prices, a boon for
those who owned them—mostly rich people.
The Fed backstopped corporate debt in 2008. That helped those who owned that debt—
mostly rich people.
Tax cuts over the last 20 years have predominantly gone to those with higher incomes.
People with higher incomes send their kids to the best colleges. Those kids can go on to
earn higher incomes and invest in corporate debt that will be backstopped by the Fed, own
stocks that will be supported by various government policies, and so on.
None of these things are problems in and of themselves, which is why they stay in place.
But they’re symptomatic of the bigger thing that’s happened since the early 1980s: The
economy works better for some people than others. Success isn’t as meritocratic as it used
to be and, when success is granted, it’s rewarded with higher gains than in previous eras.
You don’t have to think that’s morally right or wrong.
And, again, in this story it doesn’t matter why it happened.
It just matters that it did happen, and it caused the economy to shift away from people’s
expectations that were set after the war: That there’s a broad middle class without
systematic inequality, where your neighbors next door and a few miles down the road live a
life that’s pretty similar to yours.
Part of the reason these expectations have stuck around for 35 years after they shifted away
from reality is because they felt so good for so many people when they were valid.
Something that good—or at least the impression that it was that good—isn’t easy to let go
of.
So people haven’t let go of it. They want it back.
10. The Tea Party, Occupy Wall Street, Brexit, and Donald Trump each
represents a group shouting, “Stop the ride, I want off.”
The details of their shouting are different, but they’re all shouting—at least in part—
because stuff isn’t working for them within the context of the post-war expectation that
stuff should work roughly the same for roughly everyone.
You can scoff at linking the rise of Trump to income inequality alone. And you should. These
things are always layers of complexity deep. But it’s a key part of what drives people to
think, “I don’t live in the world I expected. That pisses me off. So screw this. And screw you!
I’m going to fight for something totally different, because this—whatever it is—isn’t
working.”
Take that mentality and raise it to the power of Facebook, Instagram, and cable news—
where people are more keenly aware of how other people live than ever before. It’s gasoline
on a flame. Benedict Evans says, “The more the Internet exposes people to new points of
view, the angrier people get that different views exist.” That’s a big shift from the post-war

[PAGE 243]
economy where the range of economic opinions were smaller, both because the actual
range of outcomes was lower and because it wasn’t as easy to see and learn what other
people thought and how they lived.
I’m not pessimistic. Economics is the story of cycles. Things come, things go.
The unemployment rate is now the lowest it’s been in decades. Wages are now actually
growing faster for low-income workers than the rich.⁷⁶ College costs by and large stopped
growing once grants are factored in.⁷⁷ If everyone studied advances in health care,
communication, transportation, and civil rights since the Glorious 1950s, my guess is most
wouldn’t want to go back.
But a central theme of this story is that expectations move slower than reality on the
ground. That was true when people clung to 1950s expectations as the economy changed
over the next 35 years. And even if a middle-class boom began today, expectations that the
odds are stacked against everyone but those at the top may stick around.
So the era of “This isn’t working” may stick around.
And the era of “We need something radically new, right now, whatever it is” may stick
around.
Which, in a way, is part of what starts events that led to things like World War II, where this
story began.
History is just one damned thing after another.

[PAGE 244]
1 J. Pressler, “Former Merrill Lynch Executive Forced to Declare Bankruptcy Just to Keep a
$14 Million Roof Over His Head,” New York magazine (April 9, 2010).
2 Ibid.
3 L. Thomas Jr., “The Tale of the $8 Million ‘Bargain’ House in Greenwich,” The New York
Times (January 25, 2014).
4 U. Malmendier, S. Nagel, “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect Risk-
Taking?” (August 2007).
5 “How large are 401(k)s?” Investment Company Institute (December 2019).
6 R. Butler, “Retirement Pay Often Is Scanty,” The New York Times (August 14, 1955).
7 “Higher education in the United States,” Wikipedia.
8 K. Bancalari, “Private college tuition is rising faster than inflation .... again,” USA Today
(June 9, 2017).

[PAGE 245]
9 “How Many People Die Rock Climbing?” The Rockulus.
10 A. T. Vanderbilt II, Fortune’s Children: The Fall of the House of Vanderbilt (William
Morrow Paperbacks, 2012).
11 D. McDonald, “Rajat Gupta: Touched by scandal,” Fortune (October 1, 2010).
12 “Did millionaire Rajat Gupta suffer from billionaire envy?” The Economic Times (March
27, 2011).
13 J. Nicas, “Facebook Connected Her to a Tattooed Soldier in Iraq. Or So She Thought,” The
New York Times (July 28, 2019).
14 T. Maloney, “The Best-Paid Hedge Fund Managers Made $7.7 Billion in 2018,” Bloomberg
(February 15, 2019).
15 S. Weart, “The Discovery of Global Warming,” history.aip.org/climate/cycles.htm (January
2020). (January 2020).
16 S. Langlois, “From $6,000 to $73 billion: Warren Buffett’s wealth through the ages,”
MarketWatch (January 6, 2017).
17 D. Boudreaux, “Turnover in the Forbes 400, 2008–2013,” Cafe Hayek (May 16, 2014).
18 M. Pabrai, www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=200&v=YmmIbrKDYbw..
19 “Art Dealers: The Other Vincent van Gogh,” Horizon Research Group (June 2010).
20 www.collaborativefund.com/uploads/venture-returns.png
21 “The Agony and the Ecstasy: The Risks and Rewards of a Concentrated Stock Position,”
Eye on the Market, J.P. Morgan (2014).

[PAGE 246]
22 L. Eadicicco, “Here’s Why You Probably Won’t Get Hired At Google,” Business Insider
(October 23, 2014).
23 “What is the offer acceptance rate for Facebook software engineering positions?”
Quora.com..
24 W. Fulton, “If You Want to Build a Great Team, Hire Apple Employees,” Forbes (June 22,
2012).
25 J. Berger, “How to Change Anyone’s Mind,” The Wall Street Journal (February 21, 2020).
26 D. Sivers, “How I got rich on the other hand,” sivers.org (October 30, 2019). (October 30,
2019).
27 N. Chokshi, “Americans Are Among the Most Stressed People in the World, Poll Finds,”
The New York Times (April 25, 2019).
28 Russell Sage Foundation—Chartbook of Social Inequality.
29 D. Thompson, “Why White-Collar Workers Spend All Day at the Office,” The Atlantic
(December 4, 2019).
30 “Rihanna’s ex-accountant fires back,” News24 (March 24, 2014).
31 B. Mann, “Want to Get Rich and Stay Rich?” The Motley Fool (March 7, 2017).
32 “U.S. energy intensity projected to continue its steady decline through 2040,” U.S.
Energy Information Administration (March 1, 2013).
33 Julius Wagner-Jauregg—Biographical, nobelprize.org..
34 J. M. Cavaillon, “Good and bad fever,” Critical Care 16:2 (2012).
35 “Fever—Myths Versus Facts,” Seattle Children’s.

[PAGE 247]
36 J. J. Ray, and C. I. Schulman, “Fever: suppress or let it ride?” Journal of Thoracic Disease
7:12 (2015).
37 A. LaFrance, “A Cultural History of the Fever,” The Atlantic (September 16, 2015).
38 J. Zweig, “What Harry Markowitz Meant,” jasonzweig.com (October 2, 2017). (October 2,
2017).
39 L. Pleven, “In Bogle Family, It’s Either Passive or Aggressive,” The Wall Street Journal
(November 28, 2013).
40 C. Shapiro and M. Housel, “Disrupting Investors’ Own Game,” The Collaborative Fund.
41 www.bylo.org
42 Washington State University, “For pundits, it’s better to be confident than correct,”
ScienceDaily (May 28, 2013).
43 “Daniel Kahneman’s Favorite Approach For Making Better Decisions,” Farnham Street
(January 2014).
44 W. Buffett, Letter to the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. (2008).
45 W. Buffett, Letter to the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. (2006).
46 B. Plumer, “Only 27 percent of college grads have a job related to their major,” The
Washington Post (May 20, 2013).
47 G. Livingston, “Stay-at-home moms and dads account for about one-in-five U.S.
parents,” Pew Research Center (September 24, 2018).
48 D. Gilbert, “The psychology of your future self,” TED2014.

[PAGE 248]
49 J. Zweig, “What I Learned From Daniel Kahneman,” jasonzweig.com (March 30, 2014).
(March 30, 2014).
50 J. Ptak “Tactical Funds Miss Their Chance,” Morningstar (February 2, 2012).
51 R. Kinnel, “Mind the Gap 2019,” Morningstar (August 15, 2019).
52 M. Desmond. “Accounting Tricks Catch Up With GE,” Forbes (August 4, 2009).
53 A. Berenson, “Freddie Mac Says It Understated Profits by Up to $6.9 Billion,” The New
York Times (June 25, 2003).
54 “U.S. Home Flipping Rate Reaches a Nine-Year High in Q1 2019,” Attom Data Solutions
(June 4, 2019).
55 A. Osborn, “As if Things Weren’t Bad Enough, Russian Professor Predicts End of U.S.,”
The Wall Street Journal (December 29, 2008).
56 “Food in the Occupation of Japan,” Wikipedia.
57 J. M. Jones, “U.S. Stock Ownership Down Among All but Older, Higher-Income,” Gallup
(May 27, 2017).
58 E. Rauchway, The Great Depression and the New Deal: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford
University Press, 2008).
59 L. R. Brown, Plan B 3.0: Mobilizing to Save Civilization (W. W. Norton & Company, 2008).
60 FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
61 “U.S. Crude Oil Production—Historical Chart,” Macro Trends.
62 “Thomas Selfridge,” Wikipedia.

[PAGE 249]
63 www.nhlbi.nih.gov
64 D. Walsh, “The Tragedy of Saudi Arabia’s War,” The New York Times (October 26, 2018).
65 B. Pisani, “Active fund managers trail the S&P 500 for the ninth year in a row in triumph
for indexing,” CNBC (March 15, 2019).
66 2019 Investment Company Factbook, Investment Company Institute.
67 “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” Federal Reserve (October 30–31,
2007).
68 www.nasa.gov
69 A. Ram, “Portfolio managers shun investing in own funds,” Financial Times (September
18, 2016).
70 K. Murray “How Doctors Die,” Zócalo Public Square (November 30, 2011).
71 B. Pisani, “Active fund managers trail the S&P 500 for the ninth year in a row in triumph
for indexing,” CNBC (March 15, 2019).
72 “Treasury-Fed Accord,” federalreservehistory.org..
73 S. Garon, “Beyond Our Means: Why America Spends While the World Saves,” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis (July 1, 2012).
74 “Economic Report of the President,” FRASER, St. Louis Federal Reserve (1951).
75 P. Graham, “The Refragmentation,” paulgraham.com (2016). (2016).

[PAGE 250]
76 P. Davidson, “Jobs in high-wage industries are growing fastest,” USA Today (December
14, 2019).
77 R. Channick, “Average college costs flat nationwide, at just under $15K, as universities
increase grants,” Chicago Tribune (October 16, 2018).

[PAGE 251]
Like all books, The Psychology of Money wouldn’t have been possible without the help of
countless people who helped me along the way. There are too many to list them all. But a
few who have been particularly supportive:
Brian Richards, who bet on me before anyone else.
Craig Shapiro, who bet on me when he didn’t have to.
Gretchen Housel, whose support is unwavering.
Jenna Abdou, who helps while asking for nothing in return.
Craig Pearce, who encourages, guides, and grounds me.
Jamie Catherwood, Josh Brown, Brent Beshore, Barry Ritholtz, Ben Carlson, Chris Hill,
Michael Batnick, James Osorne, whose feedback is invaluable.
Thank you.

[PAGE 252]
harriman house ltd
3 Viceroy Court
Bedford Road
Petersfield
Hampshire
GU32 3LJ
GREAT BRITAIN
Tel: +44 (0)1730 233870
Email: enquiries@harriman-house.com
Website: harriman.house
First published in 2020.
Copyright © Morgan Housel
The right of Morgan Housel to be identified as the Author
has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Design
and Patents Act 1988.
Paperback ISBN: 978-0-85719-768-9

[PAGE 253]
eBook ISBN: 978-0-85719-769-6
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained from
the British Library.
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior
written permission of the Publisher. This book may not be
lent, resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of
trade in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published without the prior written consent of the
Publisher.
Whilst every effort has been made to ensure that
information in this book is accurate, no liability can be
accepted for any loss incurred in any way whatsoever by any
person relying solely on the information contained herein.
No responsibility for loss occasioned to any person or
corporate body acting or refraining to act as a result of
reading material in this book can be accepted by the
Publisher, by the Author, or by the employers of the Author.