chapter 7: gaining control over

chapter 7: gaining control over
your time.
Everyone knows the tangible stuff money buys. The
intangible stuff is harder to wrap your head around, so it
tends to go unnoticed. But the intangible benefits of money
can be far more valuable and capable of increasing your
happiness than the tangible things that are obvious targets
of our savings.
Savings without a spending goal gives you options and
flexibility, the ability to wait and the opportunity to pounce.
It gives you time to think. It lets you change course on your
own terms.
Every bit of savings is like taking a point in the future that
would have been owned by someone else and giving it back
to yourself.

[PAGE 115]
That flexibility and control over your time is an
unseen return on wealth.
What is the return on cash in the bank that gives you the
option of changing careers, or retiring early, or freedom from
worry?
I’d say it’s incalculable.
It’s incalculable in two ways. It’s so large and important that
we can’t put a price on it. But it’s also literally incalculable—
we can’t measure it like we can measure interest rates—and
what we can’t measure we tend to overlook.
When you don’t have control over your time, you’re forced to
accept whatever bad luck is thrown your way. But if you
have flexibility you have the time to wait for no-brainer
opportunities to fall in your lap. This is a hidden return on
your savings.
Savings in the bank that earn 0% interest might actually
generate an extraordinary return if they give you the
flexibility to take a job with a lower salary but more purpose,
or wait for investment opportunities that come when those
without flexibility turn desperate.
And that hidden return is becoming more important.
The world used to be hyper-local. Just over 100 years ago
75% of Americans had neither telephones nor regular mail
service, according to historian Robert Gordon. That made
competition hyper-local. A worker with just average

[PAGE 116]
intelligence might be the best in their town, and they got
treated like the best because they didn’t have to compete
with the smarter worker in another town.
That’s now changed.
A hyper-connected world means the talent pool you
compete in has gone from hundreds or thousands spanning
your town to millions or billions spanning the globe. This is
especially true for jobs that rely on working with your head
versus your muscles: teaching, marketing, analysis,
consulting, accounting, programming, journalism, and even
medicine increasingly compete in global talent pools. More
fields will fall into this category as digitization erases global
boundaries—as “software eats the world,” as venture
capitalist Marc Andreesen puts it.
A question you should ask as the range of your competition
expands is, “How do I stand out?”
“I’m smart” is increasingly a bad answer to that question,
because there are a lot of smart people in the world. Almost
600 people ace the SATs each year. Another 7,000 come
within a handful of points. In a winner-take-all and
globalized world these kinds of people are increasingly your
direct competitors.
Intelligence is not a reliable advantage in a world that’s
become as connected as ours has.
But flexibility is.
In a world where intelligence is hyper-competitive and many
previous technical skills have become automated,
competitive advantages tilt toward nuanced and soft skills—
like communication, empathy, and, perhaps most of all,
flexibility.

[PAGE 117]
If you have flexibility you can wait for good opportunities,
both in your career and for your investments. You’ll have a
better chance of being able to learn a new skill when it’s
necessary. You’ll feel less urgency to chase competitors who
can do things you can’t, and have more leeway to find your
passion and your niche at your own pace. You can find a new
routine, a slower pace, and think about life with a different
set of assumptions. The ability to do those things when most
others can’t is one of the few things that will set you apart in
a world where intelligence is no longer a sustainable
advantage.
Having more control over your time and options is becoming
one of the most valuable currencies in the world.
That’s why more people can, and more people should, save
money.
You know what else they should do? Stop trying to be so
rational. Let me tell you why.

[PAGE 118]


[PAGE 119]
You’re not a spreadsheet. You’re a person. A screwed up,
emotional person.
It took me a while to figure this out, but once it clicked I
realized it’s one of the most important parts of finance.
With it comes something that often goes overlooked: Do not
aim to be coldly rational when making financial decisions.
Aim to just be pretty reasonable. Reasonable is more
realistic and you have a better chance of sticking with it for
the long run, which is what matters most when managing
money.
To show you what I mean, let me tell you the story of a guy
who tried to cure syphilis with malaria.
Julius Wagner-Jauregg was a 19th-century psychiatrist with
two unique skills: He was good at recognizing patterns, and
what others saw as “crazy” he found merely “bold.”
His specialty was patients with severe neurosyphilis—then a
fatal diagnosis with no known treatment. He began noticing
a pattern: syphilis patients tended to recover if they had the
added misfortune of having prolonged fevers from an
unrelated ailment.
Wagner-Jauregg assumed this was due to a hunch that had
been around for centuries but doctors didn’t understand
well: fevers play a role in helping the body fight infection.
So he jumped to the logical conclusion.

[PAGE 120]
In the early 1900s Wagner-Jauregg began injecting patients
with low-end strains of typhoid, malaria, and smallpox to
trigger fevers strong enough to kill off their syphilis. This
was as dangerous as it sounds. Some of his patients died
from the treatment. He eventually settled on a weak version
of malaria, since it could be effectively countered with
quinine after a few days of bone-rattling fevers.
After some tragic trial and error his experiment worked.
Wagner-Jauregg reported that 6 in 10 syphilis patients
treated with “malariotherapy” recovered, compared to
around 3 in 10 patients left alone. He won the Nobel Prize in
medicine in 1927. The organization today notes: “The main
work that concerned Wagner-Jauregg throughout his
working life was the endeavour to cure mental disease by
inducing a fever.”³³
Penicillin eventually made malariotherapy for syphilis
patients obsolete, thank goodness. But Wagner-Jauregg is
one of the only doctors in history who not only recognized
fever’s role in fighting infection, but also prescribed it as a
treatment.
Fevers have always been as feared as they are mysterious.
Ancient Romans worshiped Febris, the Goddess who
protected people from fevers. Amulets were left at temples
to placate her, hoping to stave off the next round of shivers.
But Wagner-Jauregg was onto something. Fevers are not
accidental nuisances. They do play a role in the body’s road
to recovery. We now have better, more scientific evidence of
fever’s usefulness in fighting infection. A one-degree
increase in body temperature has been shown to slow the
replication rate of some viruses by a factor of 200.
“Numerous investigators have identified a better outcome
among patients who displayed fever,” one NIH paper

[PAGE 121]
writes.³⁴ The Seattle Children’s Hospital includes a section
on its website to educate parents who may panic at the
slightest rise in their child’s temperature: “Fevers turn on
the body’s immune system. They help the body fight
infection. Normal fevers between 100° and 104° f are good
for sick children.”³⁵
But that’s where the science ends and reality takes over.
Fever is almost universally seen as a bad thing. They’re
treated with drugs like Tylenol to reduce them as quickly as
they appear. Despite millions of years of evolution as a
defense mechanism, no parent, no patient, few doctors, and
certainly no drug company views fever as anything but a
misfortune that should be eliminated.
These views do not match the known science. One study
was blunt: “Treatment of fever is common in the ICU setting
and likely related to standard dogma rather than evidence-
based practice.”³⁶ Howard Markel, director of the Center for
the History of Medicine, once said of fever phobia: “These
are cultural practices that spread just as widely as the
infectious diseases that are behind them.”³⁷
Why does this happen? If fevers are beneficial, why do we
fight them so universally?
I don’t think it’s complicated: Fevers hurt. And people don’t
want to hurt.
That’s it.
A doctor’s goal is not just to cure disease. It’s to cure disease
within the confines of what’s reasonable and tolerable to the
patient. Fevers can have marginal benefits in fighting
infection, but they hurt. And I go to the doctor to stop
hurting. I don’t care about double-blind studies when I’m

[PAGE 122]
shivering under a blanket. If you have a pill that can make a
fever stop, give it to me now.
It may be rational to want a fever if you have an infection.
But it’s not reasonable.
That philosophy—aiming to be reasonable instead of
rational—is one more people should consider when making
decisions with their money.
Academic finance is devoted to finding the mathematically
optimal investment strategies. My own theory is that, in the
real world, people do not want the mathematically optimal
strategy. They want the strategy that maximizes for how
well they sleep at night.
Harry Markowitz won the Nobel Prize for exploring the
mathematical tradeoff between risk and return. He was once
asked how he invested his own money, and described his
portfolio allocation in the 1950s, when his models were first
developed:
I visualized my grief if the stock market went way up and I
wasn’t in it—or if it went way down and I was completely in
it. My intention was to minimize my future regret. So I split
my contributions 50/50 between bonds and equities.
Markowitz eventually changed his investment strategy,
diversifying the mix. But two things here are important.

[PAGE 123]
One is that “minimizing future regret” is hard to rationalize
on paper but easy to justify in real life. A rational investor
makes decisions based on numeric facts. A reasonable
investor makes them in a conference room surrounded by
co-workers you want to think highly of you, with a spouse
you don’t want to let down, or judged against the silly but
realistic competitors that are your brother-in-law, your
neighbor, and your own personal doubts. Investing has a
social component that’s often ignored when viewed through
a strictly financial lens.
The second is that this is fine. Jason Zweig, who conducted
the interview when Markowitz described how he invested,
later reflected:
My own view is that people are neither rational nor
irrational. We are human. We don’t like to think harder than
we need to, and we have unceasing demands on our
attention. Seen in that light, there’s nothing surprising
about the fact that the pioneer of modern portfolio theory
built his initial portfolio with so little regard for his own
research. Nor is it surprising that he adjusted it later.³⁸
Markowitz is neither rational or irrational. He’s reasonable.
What’s often overlooked in finance is that something can be
technically true but contextually nonsense.
In 2008 a pair of researchers from Yale published a study
arguing young savers should supercharge their retirement
accounts using two-to-one margin (two dollars of debt for
every dollar of their own money) when buying stocks. It
suggests investors taper that leverage as they age, which

[PAGE 124]
lets a saver take more risk when they’re young and can
handle a magnified market rollercoaster, and less when
they’re older.
Even if using leverage left you wiped out when you were
young (if you use two-to-one margin a 50% market drop
leaves you with nothing) the researchers showed savers
would still be better off in the long run so long as they
picked themselves back up, followed the plan, and kept
saving in a two-to-one leveraged account the day after being
wiped out.
The math works on paper. It’s a rational strategy.
But it’s almost absurdly unreasonable.
No normal person could watch 100% of their retirement
account evaporate and be so unphased that they carry on
with the strategy undeterred. They’d quit, look for a
different option, and perhaps sue their financial advisor.
The researchers argued that when using their strategy “the
expected retirement wealth is 90% higher compared to life-
cycle funds.” It is also 100% less reasonable.
There is, in fact, a rational reason to favor what look like
irrational decisions.
Here’s one: Let me suggest that you love your investments.
This is not traditional advice. It’s almost a badge of honor for
investors to claim they’re emotionless about their
investments, because it seems rational.

[PAGE 125]
But if lacking emotions about your strategy or the stocks you
own increases the odds you’ll walk away from them when
they become difficult, what looks like rational thinking
becomes a liability. The reasonable investors who love their
technically imperfect strategies have an edge, because
they’re more likely to stick with those strategies.
There are few financial variables more correlated to
performance than commitment to a strategy during its lean
years—both the amount of performance and the odds of
capturing it over a given period of time. The historical odds
of making money in U.S. markets are 50/50 over one-day
periods, 68% in one-year periods, 88% in 10-year periods,
and (so far) 100% in 20-year periods. Anything that keeps
you in the game has a quantifiable advantage.
If you view “do what you love” as a guide to a happier life, it
sounds like empty fortune cookie advice. If you view it as the
thing providing the endurance necessary to put the
quantifiable odds of success in your favor, you realize it
should be the most important part of any financial strategy.
Invest in a promising company you don’t care about, and
you might enjoy it when everything’s going well. But when
the tide inevitably turns you’re suddenly losing money on
something you’re not interested in. It’s a double burden, and
the path of least resistance is to move onto something else.
If you’re passionate about the company to begin with—you
love the mission, the product, the team, the science,
whatever—the inevitable down times when you’re losing
money or the company needs help are blunted by the fact
that at least you feel like you’re part of something
meaningful. That can be the necessary motivation that
prevents you from giving up and moving on.

[PAGE 126]
There are several other times when it’s fine to be reasonable
instead of rational with money.
There’s a well-documented “home bias,” where people
prefer to invest in companies from the country they live in
while ignoring the other 95%+ of the planet. It’s not
rational, until you consider that investing is effectively
giving money to strangers. If familiarity helps you take the
leap of faith required to remain backing those strangers, it’s
reasonable.
Day trading and picking individual stocks is not rational for
most investors—the odds are heavily against your success.
But they’re both reasonable in small amounts if they scratch
an itch hard enough to leave the rest of your more
diversified investments alone. Investor Josh Brown, who
advocates and mostly owns diversified funds, once
explained why he also owns a smattering of individual
stocks: “I’m not buying individual stocks because I think I’m
going to generate alpha [outperformance]. I just love stocks
and have ever since I was 20 years old. And it’s my money, I
get to do whatever.” Quite reasonable.
Most forecasts about where the economy and the stock
market are heading next are terrible, but making forecasts is
reasonable. It’s hard to wake up in the morning telling
yourself you have no clue what the future holds, even if it’s
true. Acting on investment forecasts is dangerous. But I get
why people try to predict what will happen next year. It’s
human nature. It’s reasonable.
Jack Bogle, the late founder of Vanguard, spent his career on
a crusade to promote low-cost passive index investing. Many
thought it interesting that his son found a career as an
active, high-fee hedge fund and mutual fund manager.
Bogle—the man who said high-fee funds violate “the

[PAGE 127]
humble rules of arithmetic”—invested some of his own
money in his son’s funds. What’s the explanation?
“We do some things for family reasons,” Bogle told The Wall
Street Journal. “If it’s not consistent, well, life isn’t always
consistent.”³⁹
Indeed, it rarely is.

[PAGE 128]


[PAGE 129]
Stanford professor Scott Sagan once said something
everyone who follows the economy or investment markets
should hang on their wall: “Things that have never
happened before happen all the time.”
History is mostly the study of surprising events. But it is
often used by investors and economists as an unassailable
guide to the future.
Do you see the irony?
Do you see the problem?
It is smart to have a deep appreciation for economic and
investing history. History helps us calibrate our expectations,
study where people tend to go wrong, and offers a rough
guide of what tends to work. But it is not, in any way, a map
of the future.
A trap many investors fall into is what I call “historians as
prophets” fallacy: An overreliance on past data as a signal to
future conditions in a field where innovation and change are
the lifeblood of progress.
You can’t blame investors for doing this. If you view
investing as a hard science, history should be a perfect
guide to the future. Geologists can look at a billion years of
historical data and form models of how the earth behaves.
So can meteorologists. And doctors—kidneys operate the
same way in 2020 as they did in 1020.
But investing is not a hard science. It’s a massive group of
people making imperfect decisions with limited information
about things that will have a massive impact on their
wellbeing, which can make even smart people nervous,
greedy and paranoid.

[PAGE 130]
Richard Feynman, the great physicist, once said, “Imagine
how much harder physics would be if electrons had
feelings.” Well, investors have feelings. Quite a few of them.
That’s why it’s hard to predict what they’ll do next based
solely on what they did in the past.
The cornerstone of economics is that things change over
time, because the invisible hand hates anything staying too
good or too bad indefinitely. Investor Bill Bonner once
described how Mr. Market works: “He’s got a ‘Capitalism at
Work’ T-shirt on and a sledgehammer in his hand.” Few
things stay the same for very long, which means we can’t
treat historians as prophets.
The most important driver of anything tied to money is the
stories people tell themselves and the preferences they have
for goods and services. Those things don’t tend to sit still.
They change with culture and generation. They’re always
changing and always will.
The mental trick we play on ourselves here is an over-
admiration of people who have been there, done that, when
it comes to money. Experiencing specific events does not
necessarily qualify you to know what will happen next. In
fact it rarely does, because experience leads to
overconfidence more than forecasting ability.
Investor Michael Batnick once explained this well.
Confronted with the argument that few investors are
prepared for rising interest rates because they’ve never
experienced them—the last big period of rising interest
rates occurred almost 40 years ago—he argued that it didn’t
matter, because experiencing or even studying what
happened in the past might not serve as any guide to what
will happen when rates rise in the future:

[PAGE 131]
So what? Will the current rate hike look like the last one, or
the one before that? Will different asset classes behave
similarly, the same, or the exact opposite?
On the one hand, people that have been investing through
the events of 1987, 2000 and 2008 have experienced a lot
of different markets. On the other hand, isn’t it possible that
this experience can lead to overconfidence? Failing to admit
you’re wrong? Anchoring to previous outcomes?
Two dangerous things happen when you rely too heavily on
investment history as a guide to what’s going to happen
next.
1. You’ll likely miss the outlier events that move the
needle the most.
The most important events in historical data are the big
outliers, the record-breaking events. They are what move
the needle in the economy and the stock market. The Great
Depression. World War II. The dot-com bubble. September
11th. The housing crash of the mid-2000s. A handful of
outlier events play an enormous role because they influence
so many unrelated events in their wake.
Fifteen billion people were born in the 19th and 20th
centuries. But try to imagine how different the global
economy—and the whole world—would be today if just
seven of them never existed:

[PAGE 132]
Adolf Hitler
Joseph Stalin
Mao Zedong
Gavrilo Princip
Thomas Edison
Bill Gates
Martin Luther King
I’m not even sure that’s the most meaningful list. But almost
everything about the world today—from borders to
technology to social norms—would be different if these
seven people hadn’t left their mark. Another way to put this
is that 0.00000000004% of people were responsible for
perhaps the majority of the world’s direction over the last
century.

[PAGE 133]
The same goes for projects, innovations, and events.
Imagine the last century without:
The Great Depression
World War II
The Manhattan Project
Vaccines
Antibiotics
ARPANET
September 11th
The fall of the Soviet Union
How many projects and events occurred in the 20th
century? Billions, trillions—who knows. But those eight

[PAGE 134]
alone impacted the world orders upon orders of magnitude
more than others.
The thing that makes tail events easy to underappreciate is
how easy it is to underestimate how things compound. How,
for example, 9/11 prompted the Federal Reserve to cut
interest rates, which helped drive the housing bubble, which
led to the financial crisis, which led to a poor jobs market,
which led tens of millions to seek a college education, which
led to $1.6 trillion in student loans with a 10.8% default
rate. It’s not intuitive to link 19 hijackers to the current
weight of student loans, but that’s what happens in a world
driven by a few outlier tail events.
The majority of what’s happening at any given moment in
the global economy can be tied back to a handful of past
events that were nearly impossible to predict.
The most common plot of economic history is the role of
surprises. The reason surprises occur is not because our
models are wrong or our intelligence is low. It’s because the
odds that Adolf Hitler’s parents argued on the evening nine
months before he was born were the same as them
conceiving a child. Technology is hard to predict because Bill
Gates may have died from polio if Jonas Salk got cranky and
gave up on his quest to find a vaccine. The reason we
couldn’t predict the student loan growth is because an
airport security guard may have confiscated a hijacker’s
knife on 9/11. That’s all there is to it.
The problem is that we often use events like the Great
Depression and World War II to guide our views of things like
worst-case scenarios when thinking about future investment
returns. But those record-setting events had no precedent
when they occurred. So the forecaster who assumes the
worst (and best) events of the past will match the worst

[PAGE 135]
(and best) events of the future is not following history;
they’re accidentally assuming that the history of
unprecedented events doesn’t apply to the future.
Nassim Taleb writes in his book Fooled By Randomness:
In Pharaonic Egypt … scribes tracked the high-water mark of
the Nile and used it as an estimate for a future worst-case
scenario. The same can be seen in the Fukushima nuclear
reactor, which experienced a catastrophic failure in 2011
when a tsunami struck. It had been built to withstand the
worst past historical earthquake, with the builders not
imagining much worse—and not thinking that the worst
past event had to be a surprise, as it had no precedent.
This is not a failure of analysis. It’s a failure of imagination.
Realizing the future might not look anything like the past is
a special kind of skill that is not generally looked highly
upon by the financial forecasting community.
At a 2017 dinner I attended in New York, Daniel Kahneman
was asked how investors should respond when our forecasts
are wrong. He said:
Whenever we are surprised by something, even if we admit
that we made a mistake, we say, ‘Oh I’ll never make that
mistake again.’ But, in fact, what you should learn when you
make a mistake because you did not anticipate something is
that the world is difficult to anticipate. That’s the correct
lesson to learn from surprises: that the world is surprising.

[PAGE 136]
The correct lesson to learn from surprises is that the world is
surprising. Not that we should use past surprises as a guide
to future boundaries; that we should use past surprises as
an admission that we have no idea what might happen next.
The most important economic events of the future—things
that will move the needle the most—are things that history
gives us little to no guide about. They will be unprecedented
events. Their unprecedented nature means we won’t be
prepared for them, which is part of what makes them so
impactful. This is true for both scary events like recessions
and wars, and great events like innovation.
I’m confident in that prediction because surprises moving
the needle the most is the one forecast that’s been accurate
at virtually every point in history.
2. History can be a misleading guide to the future of
the economy and stock market because it doesn’t
account for structural changes that are relevant to
today’s world.
Consider a few big ones.
The 401(k) is 42 years old. The Roth IRA is younger, created
in the 1990s. So personal financial advice and analysis
about how Americans save for retirement today is not
directly comparable to what made sense just a generation
ago. We have new options. Things changed.
Or take venture capital. It barely existed 25 years ago. There
are single venture capital funds today that are larger than
the entire industry was a generation ago.⁴⁰ In his memoir,

[PAGE 137]
Nike founder Phil Knight wrote about his early days in
business:
There was no such thing as venture capital. An aspiring
young entrepreneur had very few places to turn, and those
places were all guarded by risk-averse gatekeepers with
zero imagination. In other words, bankers.
What this means, in effect, is that all historical data going
back just a few decades about how startups are financed is
out of date. What we know about investment cycles and
startup failure rates is not a deep base of history to learn
from, because the way companies are funded today is such
a new historical paradigm.
Or take public markets. The S&P 500 did not include
financial stocks until 1976; today, financials make up 16%
of the index. Technology stocks were virtually nonexistent 50
years ago. Today, they’re more than a fifth of the index.
Accounting rules have changed over time. So have
disclosures, auditing, and the amount of market liquidity.
Things changed.
The time between U.S. recessions has changed dramatically
over the last 150 years:

[PAGE 138]
The average time between recessions has grown from about
two years in the late 1800s to five years in the early 20th
century to eight years over the last half-century.
As I write this it looks like we’re going into recession—12
years since the last recession began in December 2007.
That’s the longest gap between recessions since before the
Civil War.
There are plenty of theories on why recessions have become
less frequent. One is that the Fed is better at managing the
business cycle, or at least extending it. Another is that heavy
industry is more prone to boom-and-bust overproduction
than the service industries that dominated the last 50 years.

[PAGE 139]
The pessimistic view is that we now have fewer recessions,
but when they occur they are more powerful than before.
For our argument it doesn’t particularly matter what caused
the change. What matters is that things clearly changed.
To show how these historic changes should affect investing
decisions, consider the work of a man many believe to be
one of the greatest investment minds of all time: Benjamin
Graham.
Graham’s classic book, The Intelligent Investor, is more than
theory. It gives practical directions like formulas investors
can use to make smart investing decisions.
I read Graham’s book when I was a teenager, learning about
investing for the first time. The formulas presented in the
book were appealing to me, because they were literally
step-by-step instructions on how to get rich. Just follow the
instructions. It seemed so easy.
But something becomes clear when you try applying some
of these formulas: few of them actually work.
Graham advocated purchasing stocks trading for less than
their net working assets—basically cash in the bank minus
all debts. This sounds great, but few stocks actually trade
that cheaply anymore—other than, say, a penny stock
accused of accounting fraud.
One of Graham’s criteria instructs conservative investors to
avoid stocks trading for more than 1.5 times book value. If
you followed this rule over the last decade you would have
owned almost nothing but insurance and bank stocks. There
is no world where that is OK.
The Intelligent Investor is one of the greatest investing
books of all time. But I don’t know a single investor who has

[PAGE 140]
done well implementing Graham’s published formulas. The
book is full of wisdom—perhaps more than any other
investment book ever published. But as a how-to guide, it’s
questionable at best.
What happened? Was Graham a showman who sounded
good but whose advice didn’t work? Not at all. He was a
wildly successful investor himself.
But he was practical. And he was a true contrarian. He
wasn’t so wedded to investing ideas that he’d stick with
them when too many other investors caught onto those
theories, making them so popular as to render their
potential useless. Jason Zweig—who annotated a later
version of Graham’s book—once wrote:
Graham was constantly experimenting and retesting his
assumptions and seeking out what works—not what worked
yesterday but what works today. In each revised edition of
The Intelligent Investor, Graham discarded the formulas he
presented in the previous edition and replaced them with
new ones, declaring, in a sense, that “those do not work
anymore, or they do not work as well as they used to; these
are the formulas that seem to work better now.”
One of the common criticisms made of Graham is that all
the formulas in the 1972 edition are antiquated. The only
proper response to this criticism is to say: “Of course they
are! They are the ones he used to replace the formulas in
the 1965 edition, which replaced the formulas in the 1954
edition, which, in turn, replaced the ones from the 1949
edition, which were used to augment the original formulas
that he presented in Security Analysis in 1934.”

[PAGE 141]
Graham died in 1976. If the formulas he advocated were
discarded and updated five times between 1934 and 1972,
how relevant do you think they are in 2020? Or will be in
2050?
Just before he died Graham was asked whether detailed
analysis of individual stocks—a tactic he became famous for
—remained a strategy he favored. He answered:
In general, no. I am no longer an advocate of elaborate
techniques of security analysis in order to find superior value
opportunities. This was a rewarding activity, say, 40 years
ago, when our textbook was first published. But the
situation has changed a great deal since then.⁴¹
What changed was: Competition grew as opportunities
became well known; technology made information more
accessible; and industries changed as the economy shifted
from industrial to technology sectors, which have different
business cycles and capital uses.
Things changed.
An interesting quirk of investing history is that the further
back you look, the more likely you are to be examining a
world that no longer applies to today. Many investors and
economists take comfort in knowing their forecasts are
backed up by decades, even centuries, of data. But since
economies evolve, recent history is often the best guide to
the future, because it’s more likely to include important
conditions that are relevant to the future.

[PAGE 142]
There’s a common phrase in investing, usually used
mockingly, that “It’s different this time.” If you need to rebut
someone who’s predicting the future won’t perfectly mirror
the past, say, “Oh, so you think it’s different this time?” and
drop the mic. It comes from investor John Templeton’s view
that “The four most dangerous words in investing are, ‘it’s
different this time.’”
Templeton, though, admitted that it is different at least 20%
of the time. The world changes. Of course it does. And those
changes are what matter most over time. Michael Batnick
put it: “The twelve most dangerous words in investing are,
‘The four most dangerous words in investing are, ‘it’s
different this time.’”
That doesn’t mean we should ignore history when thinking
about money. But there’s an important nuance: The further
back in history you look, the more general your takeaways
should be. General things like people’s relationship to greed
and fear, how they behave under stress, and how they
respond to incentives tend to be stable in time. The history
of money is useful for that kind of stuff.
But specific trends, specific trades, specific sectors, specific
causal relationships about markets, and what people should
do with their money are always an example of evolution in
progress. Historians are not prophets.
The question, then, is how should we think about and plan
for the future? Let’s take a look in the next chapter.

[PAGE 143]


[PAGE 144]
Some of the best examples of smart financial behavior can
be found in an unlikely place: Las Vegas casinos.
Not among all players, of course. But a tiny group of
blackjack players who practice card counting can teach
ordinary people something extraordinarily important about
managing money: the importance of room for error.
The fundamentals of blackjack card counting are simple:
No one can know with certainty what card the dealer will
draw next.
But by tracking what cards have already been dealt you can
calculate what cards remain in the deck.
Doing so can tell you the odds of a particular card being
drawn by the dealer.
As a player, you bet more when the odds of getting a card
you want are in your favor and less when they are against
you.
The mechanics of how this is done don’t matter here. What
matters is that a blackjack card counter knows they are
playing a game of odds, not certainties. In any particular

[PAGE 145]
hand they think they have a good chance of being right, but
know there’s a decent chance they’re wrong. It might sound
strange given their profession, but their strategy relies
entirely on humility—humility that they don’t know, and
cannot know exactly what’s going to happen next, so play
their hand accordingly. The card counting system works
because it tilts the odds ever so slightly from the house to
the player. But bet too heavily even when the odds seem in
your favor and, if you’re wrong, you might lose so much that
you don’t have enough money to keep playing.
There is never a moment when you’re so right that you can
bet every chip in front of you. The world isn’t that kind to
anyone—not consistently, anyways. You have to give yourself
room for error. You have to plan on your plan not going
according to plan.
Kevin Lewis, a successful card counter portrayed in the book
Bringing Down the House, wrote more about this
philosophy:
Although card counting is statistically proven to work, it
does not guarantee you will win every hand—let alone every
trip you make to the casino. We must make sure that we
have enough money to withstand any swings of bad luck.
Let’s assume you have roughly a 2 percent edge over the
casino. That still means the casino will win 49 percent of the
time. Therefore, you need to have enough money to
withstand any variant swings against you. A rule of thumb is
that you should have at least a hundred basic units.
Assuming you start with ten thousand dollars, you could
comfortably play a hundred-dollar unit.

[PAGE 146]
History is littered with good ideas taken too far, which are
indistinguishable from bad ideas. The wisdom in having
room for error is acknowledging that uncertainty,
randomness, and chance—“unknowns”—are an ever-present
part of life. The only way to deal with them is by increasing
the gap between what you think will happen and what can
happen while still leaving you capable of fighting another
day.
Benjamin Graham is known for his concept of margin of
safety. He wrote about it extensively and in mathematical
detail. But my favorite summary of the theory came when he
mentioned in an interview that “the purpose of the margin
of safety is to render the forecast unnecessary.”
It’s hard to overstate how much power lies in that simple
statement.
Margin of safety—you can also call it room for error or
redundancy—is the only effective way to safely navigate a
world that is governed by odds, not certainties. And almost
everything related to money exists in that kind of world.
Forecasting with precision is hard. This is obvious to the card
counter, because no one could possibly know where a
particular card lies in a shuffled deck. It’s less obvious to
someone asking, “What will the average annual return of
the stock market be over the next 10 years?” or “On what
date will I be able to retire?” But they are fundamentally the
same. The best we can do is think about odds.
Graham’s margin of safety is a simple suggestion that we
don’t need to view the world in front of us as black or white,
predictable or a crapshoot. The grey area—pursuing things

[PAGE 147]
where a range of potential outcomes are acceptable—is the
smart way to proceed.
But people underestimate the need for room for error in
almost everything they do that involves money. Stock
analysts give their clients price targets, not price ranges.
Economic forecasters predict things with precise figures;
rarely broad probabilities. The pundit who speaks in
unshakable certainties will gain a larger following than the
one who says “We can’t know for sure,” and speaks in
probabilities.⁴²
We do this in all kinds of financial endeavors, especially
those related to our own decisions. Harvard psychologist
Max Bazerman once showed that when analyzing other
people’s home renovation plans, most people estimate the
project will run between 25% and 50% over budget.⁴³ But
when it comes to their own projects, people estimate that
renovations will be completed on time and at budget. Oh,
the eventual disappointment.
Two things cause us to avoid room for error. One is the idea
that somebody must know what the future holds, driven by
the uncomfortable feeling that comes from admitting the
opposite. The second is that you’re therefore doing yourself
harm by not taking actions that fully exploit an accurate
view of that future coming true.
But room for error is underappreciated and misunderstood.
It’s often viewed as a conservative hedge, used by those
who don’t want to take much risk or aren’t confident in their
views. But when used appropriately, it’s quite the opposite.
Room for error lets you endure a range of potential
outcomes, and endurance lets you stick around long enough
to let the odds of benefiting from a low-probability outcome

[PAGE 148]
fall in your favor. The biggest gains occur infrequently, either
because they don’t happen often or because they take time
to compound. So the person with enough room for error in
part of their strategy (cash) to let them endure hardship in
another (stocks) has an edge over the person who gets
wiped out, game over, insert more tokens, when they’re
wrong.
Bill Gates understood this well. When Microsoft was a young
company, he said he “came up with this incredibly
conservative approach that I wanted to have enough money
in the bank to pay a year’s worth of payroll even if we didn’t
get any payments coming in.” Warren Buffett expressed a
similar idea when he told Berkshire Hathaway shareholders
in 2008: “I have pledged—to you, the rating agencies and
myself—to always run Berkshire with more than ample cash
... When forced to choose, I will not trade even a night’s
sleep for the chance of extra profits.”⁴⁴
There are a few specific places for investors to think about
room for error.
One is volatility. Can you survive your assets declining by
30%? On a spreadsheet, maybe yes—in terms of actually
paying your bills and staying cash-flow positive. But what
about mentally? It is easy to underestimate what a 30%
decline does to your psyche. Your confidence may become
shot at the very moment opportunity is at its highest. You—
or your spouse—may decide it’s time for a new plan, or new
career. I know several investors who quit after losses
because they were exhausted. Physically exhausted.
Spreadsheets are good at telling you when the numbers do
or don’t add up. They’re not good at modeling how you’ll
feel when you tuck your kids in at night wondering if the
investment decisions you’ve made were a mistake that will
hurt their future. Having a gap between what you can

[PAGE 149]
technically endure versus what’s emotionally possible is an
overlooked version of room for error.
Another is saving for retirement. We can look at history and
see, for example, that the U.S. stock market has returned an
annual average of 6.8% after inflation since the 1870s. It’s a
reasonable first approximation to use that as an estimate of
what to expect on your own diversified portfolio when saving
for retirement. You can use those return assumptions to
back into the amount of money you’ll need to save each
month to achieve your target nestegg.
But what if future returns are lower? Or what if long-term
history is a good estimate of the long-term future, but your
target retirement date ends up falling in the middle of a
brutal bear market, like 2009? What if a future bear market
scares you out of stocks and you end up missing a future
bull market, so the returns you actually earn are less than
the market average? What if you need to cash out your
retirement accounts in your 30s to pay for a medical
mishap?
The answer to those what ifs is, “You won’t be able to retire
like you once predicted.” Which can be a disaster.
The solution is simple: Use room for error when estimating
your future returns. This is more art than science. For my
own investments, which I’ll describe more in chapter 20, I
assume the future returns I’ll earn in my lifetime will be ⅓
lower than the historic average. So I save more than I would
if I assumed the future will resemble the past. It’s my
margin of safety. The future may be worse than ⅓ lower
than the past, but no margin of safety offers a 100%
guarantee. A one-third buffer is enough to allow me to sleep
well at night. And if the future does resemble the past, I’ll be

[PAGE 150]
pleasantly surprised. “The best way to achieve felicity is to
aim low,” says Charlie Munger. Wonderful.
An important cousin of room for error is what I call optimism
bias in risk-taking, or “Russian roulette should statistically
work” syndrome: An attachment to favorable odds when the
downside is unacceptable in any circumstances.
Nassim Taleb says, “You can be risk loving and yet
completely averse to ruin.” And indeed, you should.
The idea is that you have to take risk to get ahead, but no
risk that can wipe you out is ever worth taking. The odds are
in your favor when playing Russian roulette. But the
downside is not worth the potential upside. There is no
margin of safety that can compensate for the risk.
Same with money. The odds of many lucrative things are in
your favor. Real estate prices go up most years, and during
most years you’ll get a paycheck every other week. But if
something has 95% odds of being right, the 5% odds of
being wrong means you will almost certainly experience the
downside at some point in your life. And if the cost of the
downside is ruin, the upside the other 95% of the time likely
isn’t worth the risk, no matter how appealing it looks.
Leverage is the devil here. Leverage—taking on debt to
make your money go further—pushes routine risks into
something capable of producing ruin. The danger is that
rational optimism most of the time masks the odds of ruin
some of the time. The result is we systematically
underestimate risk. Housing prices fell 30% last decade. A
few companies defaulted on their debt. That’s capitalism. It
happens. But those with high leverage had a double

[PAGE 151]
wipeout: Not only were they left broke, but being wiped out
erased every opportunity to get back in the game at the very
moment opportunity was ripe. A homeowner wiped out in
2009 had no chance of taking advantage of cheap mortgage
rates in 2010. Lehman Brothers had no chance of investing
in cheap debt in 2009. They were done.
To get around this, I think of my own money as barbelled. I
take risks with one portion and am terrified with the other.
This is not inconsistent, but the psychology of money would
lead you to believe that it is. I just want to ensure I can
remain standing long enough for my risks to pay off. You
have to survive to succeed. To repeat a point we’ve made a
few times in this book: The ability to do what you want,
when you want, for as long as you want, has an infinite ROI.
Room for error does more than just widen the target around
what you think might happen. It also helps protect you from
things you’d never imagine, which can be the most
troublesome events we face.
The Battle of Stalingrad during World War II was the largest
battle in history. With it came equally staggering stories of
how people dealt with risk.
One came in late 1942, when a German tank unit sat in
reserve on grasslands outside the city. When tanks were
desperately needed on the front lines, something happened
that surprised everyone: Almost none of them worked.
Out of 104 tanks in the unit, fewer than 20 were operable.
Engineers quickly found the issue. Historian William Craig
writes: “During the weeks of inactivity behind the front lines,

[PAGE 152]
field mice had nested inside the vehicles and eaten away
insulation covering the electrical systems.”
The Germans had the most sophisticated equipment in the
world. Yet there they were, defeated by mice.
You can imagine their disbelief. This almost certainly never
crossed their minds. What kind of tank designer thinks
about mouse protection? Not a reasonable one. And not one
who studied tank history.
But these kinds of things happen all the time. You can plan
for every risk except the things that are too crazy to cross
your mind. And those crazy things can do the most harm,
because they happen more often than you think and you
have no plan for how to deal with them.
In 2006 Warren Buffett announced a search for his eventual
replacement. He said he needed someone “genetically
programmed to recognize and avoid serious risks, including
those never before encountered.”⁴⁵
I have seen this skill at work with startups my firm,
Collaborative Fund, has backed. Ask a founder to list the
biggest risks they face, and the usual suspects are
mentioned. But beyond the predictable struggles of running
a startup, here are a few issues we’ve dealt with among our
portfolio companies:
Water pipes broke, flooding and ruining a company’s office.
A company’s office was broken into three times.

[PAGE 153]
A company was kicked out of its manufacturing plant.
A store was shut down after a customer called the health
department because she didn’t like that another customer
brought a dog inside.
A CEO’s email was spoofed in the middle of a fundraise that
required all of his attention.
A founder had a mental breakdown.
Several of these events were existential to the company’s
future. But none were foreseeable, because none had
previously happened to the CEOs dealing with these
problems—or anyone else they knew, for that matter. It was
unchartered territory.
Avoiding these kinds of unknown risks is, almost by
definition, impossible. You can’t prepare for what you can’t
envision.
If there’s one way to guard against their damage, it’s
avoiding single points of failure.
A good rule of thumb for a lot of things in life is that
everything that can break will eventually break. So if many
things rely on one thing working, and that thing breaks, you

[PAGE 154]
are counting the days to catastrophe. That’s a single point of
failure.
Some people are remarkably good at avoiding single points
of failure. Most critical systems on airplanes have backups,
and the backups often have backups. Modern jets have four
redundant electrical systems. You can fly with one engine
and technically land with none, as every jet must be capable
of stopping on a runway with its brakes alone, without thrust
reverse from its engines. Suspension bridges can similarly
lose many of their cables without falling.
The biggest single point of failure with money is a sole
reliance on a paycheck to fund short-term spending needs,
with no savings to create a gap between what you think
your expenses are and what they might be in the future.
The trick that often goes overlooked—even by the wealthiest
—is what we saw in