chapter 10: realizing that you don’t

chapter 10: realizing that you don’t
need a specific reason to save. It’s fine to save for a car, or a
home, or for retirement. But it’s equally important to save
for things you can’t possibly predict or even comprehend—
the financial equivalent of field mice.
Predicting what you’ll use your savings for assumes you live
in a world where you know exactly what your future
expenses will be, which no one does. I save a lot, and I have
no idea what I’ll use the savings for in the future. Few
financial plans that only prepare for known risks have
enough margin of safety to survive the real world.
In fact, the most important part of every plan is planning on
your plan not going according to plan.
Now, let me show you how this applies to you.

[PAGE 155]


[PAGE 156]
Igrew up with a friend who came from neither privilege nor
natural intellect, but was the hardest-working guy I knew.
These people have a lot to teach because they have an
unfiltered understanding of every inch of the road to
success.
His life’s mission and dream as a teenager was to be a
doctor. To say the odds were stacked against him is being
charitable. No reasonable person at the time would consider
it a possibility.
But he pushed. And—a decade older than his classmates—
he eventually became a doctor.
How much fulfillment comes from starting from nothing,
bulldozing your way to the top of medical school, and
achieving one of the most noble professions against all
odds?
I spoke to him a few years ago. The conversation went like
this:
Me: “Long time no talk! How you doi—”
Him: “Awful career.”
Me: “Haha, well—”
Him: “Awful career, man.”

[PAGE 157]
This went on for 10 minutes. The stress and hours had worn
him into the ground. He seemed as disappointed in where
he is today as he was driven toward where he wanted to be
15 years ago.
An underpinning of psychology is that people are poor
forecasters of their future selves.
Imagining a goal is easy and fun. Imagining a goal in the
context of the realistic life stresses that grow with
competitive pursuits is something entirely different.
This has a big impact on our ability to plan for future
financial goals.
Every five-year-old boy wants to drive a tractor when they
grow up. Few jobs look better in the eyes of a young boy
whose idea of a good job begins and ends with “Vroom
vroom, beep beep, big tractor, here I come!”
Then many grow up and realize that driving a tractor maybe
isn’t the best career. Maybe they want something more
prestigious or lucrative.
So as a teenager they dream of being a lawyer. Now they
think—they know—their plan is set. Law school and its costs,
here we come.
Then, as a lawyer, they face such long working hours that
they rarely see their families.
So perhaps they take a lower-paying job with flexible hours.
Then they realize that childcare is so expensive that it

[PAGE 158]
consumes most of their paycheck, and they opt to be a stay-
at-home parent. This, they conclude, is finally the right
choice.
Then, at age 70, they realize that a lifetime of staying home
means they’re unprepared to afford retirement.
Many of us wind through life on a similar trajectory. Only
27% of college grads have a job related to their major,
according to the Federal Reserve.⁴⁶ Twenty-nine percent of
stay-at-home parents have a college degree.⁴⁷ Few likely
regret their education, of course. But we should
acknowledge that a new parent in their 30s may think about
life goals in a way their 18-year-old self making career goals
would never imagine.
Long-term financial planning is essential. But things change
—both the world around you, and your own goals and
desires. It is one thing to say, “We don’t know what the
future holds.” It’s another to admit that you, yourself, don’t
know today what you will even want in the future. And the
truth is, few of us do. It’s hard to make enduring long-term
decisions when your view of what you’ll want in the future is
likely to shift.
The End of History Illusion is what psychologists call the
tendency for people to be keenly aware of how much they’ve
changed in the past, but to underestimate how much their
personalities, desires, and goals are likely to change in the
future. Harvard psychologist Daniel Gilbert once said:
At every stage of our lives we make decisions that will
profoundly influence the lives of the people we’re going to
become, and then when we become those people, we’re not
always thrilled with the decisions we made. So young

[PAGE 159]
people pay good money to get tattoos removed that
teenagers paid good money to get. Middle-aged people
rushed to divorce people who young adults rushed to marry.
Older adults work hard to lose what middle-aged adults
worked hard to gain. On and on and on.⁴⁸
“All of us,” he said, “are walking around with an illusion—an
illusion that history, our personal history, has just come to
an end, that we have just recently become the people that
we were always meant to be and will be for the rest of our
lives.” We tend to never learn this lesson. Gilbert’s research
shows people from age 18 to 68 underestimate how much
they will change in the future.
You can see how this can impact a long-term financial plan.
Charlie Munger says the first rule of compounding is to
never interrupt it unnecessarily. But how do you not
interrupt a money plan—careers, investments, spending,
budgeting, whatever—when what you want out of life
changes? It’s hard. Part of the reason people like Ronald
Read—the wealthy janitor we met earlier in the book—and
Warren Buffett become so successful is because they kept
doing the same thing for decades on end, letting
compounding run wild. But many of us evolve so much over
a lifetime that we don’t want to keep doing the same thing
for decades on end. Or anything close to it. So rather than
one 80-something-year lifespan, our money has perhaps
four distinct 20-year blocks.
I know young people who purposefully live austere lives with
little income, and they’re perfectly happy with it. Then there
are those who work their tails off to pay for a life of luxury,
and they’re perfectly happy with that. Both have risks—the
former risks being unprepared to raise a family or fund

[PAGE 160]
retirement, the latter risks regret that you spent your
youthful and healthy years in a cubicle.
There is no easy solution to this problem. Tell a five-year-old
boy he should be a lawyer instead of a tractor driver and he
will disagree with every cell in his body.
But there are two things to keep in mind when making what
you think are long-term decisions.
We should avoid the extreme ends of financial
planning. Assuming you’ll be happy with a very low
income, or choosing to work endless hours in pursuit
of a high one, increases the odds that you’ll one day
find yourself at a point of regret. The fuel of the End
of History Illusion is that people adapt to most
circumstances, so the benefits of an extreme plan—
the simplicity of having hardly anything, or the thrill
of having almost everything—wear off. But the
downsides of those extremes—not being able to
afford retirement, or looking back at a life spent
devoted to chasing dollars—become enduring
regrets. Regrets are especially painful when you
abandon a previous plan and feel like you have to
run in the other direction twice as fast to make up
for lost time.
Compounding works best when you can give a plan years or
decades to grow. This is true for not only savings but careers
and relationships. Endurance is key. And when you consider
our tendency to change who we are over time, balance at
every point in your life becomes a strategy to avoid future
regret and encourage endurance.
Aiming, at every point in your working life, to have moderate
annual savings, moderate free time, no more than a

[PAGE 161]
moderate commute, and at least moderate time with your
family, increases the odds of being able to stick with a plan
and avoid regret than if any one of those things fall to the
extreme sides of the spectrum.
We should also come to accept the reality of
changing our minds. Some of the most miserable
workers I’ve met are people who stay loyal to a
career only because it’s the field they picked when
deciding on a college major at age 18. When you
accept the End of History Illusion, you realize that
the odds of picking a job when you’re not old enough
to drink that you will still enjoy when you’re old
enough to qualify for Social Security are low.
The trick is to accept the reality of change and move on as
soon as possible.
Jason Zweig, the Wall Street Journal investment columnist,
worked with psychologist Daniel Kahneman on writing
Kahneman’s book Thinking, Fast and Slow. Zweig once told
a story about a personality quirk of Kahneman’s that served
him well: “Nothing amazed me more about Danny than his
ability to detonate what we had just done,” Zweig wrote. He
and Kahneman could work endlessly on a chapter, but:
The next thing you know, [Kahneman] sends a version so
utterly transformed that it is unrecognizable: It begins
differently, it ends differently, it incorporates anecdotes and
evidence you never would have thought of, it draws on
research that you’ve never heard of.

[PAGE 162]
“When I asked Danny how he could start again as if we had
never written an earlier draft,” Zweig continued, “he said
the words I’ve never forgotten: ‘I have no sunk costs.’”⁴⁹
Sunk costs—anchoring decisions to past efforts that can’t be
refunded—are a devil in a world where people change over
time. They make our future selves prisoners to our past,
different, selves. It’s the equivalent of a stranger making
major life decisions for you.
Embracing the idea that financial goals made when you
were a different person should be abandoned without mercy
versus put on life support and dragged on can be a good
strategy to minimize future regret.
The quicker it’s done, the sooner you can get back to
compounding.
Next, let’s talk about compounding’s price of admission.

[PAGE 163]


[PAGE 164]
Everything has a price, and the key to a lot of things with
money is just figuring out what that price is and being
willing to pay it.
The problem is that the price of a lot of things is not obvious
until you’ve experienced them firsthand, when the bill is
overdue.
General Electric was the largest company in the world in
2004, worth a third of a trillion dollars. It had either been
first or second each year for the previous decade,
capitalism’s shining example of corporate aristocracy.
Then everything fell to pieces.
The 2008 financial crisis sent GE’s financing division—which
supplied more than half the company’s profits—into chaos.
It was eventually sold for scrap. Subsequent bets in oil and
energy were disasters, resulting in billions in writeoffs. GE
stock fell from $40 in 2007 to $7 by 2018.
Blame placed on CEO Jeff Immelt—who ran the company
since 2001—was immediate and harsh. He was criticized for
his leadership, his acquisitions, cutting the dividend, laying
off workers and—of course—the plunging stock price.
Rightly so: those rewarded with dynastic wealth when times
are good hold the burden of responsibility when the tide
goes out. He stepped down in 2017.
But Immelt said something insightful on his way out.
Responding to critics who said his actions were wrong and
what he should have done was obvious, Immelt told his

[PAGE 165]
successor, “Every job looks easy when you’re not the one
doing it.”
Every job looks easy when you’re not the one doing it
because the challenges faced by someone in the arena are
often invisible to those in the crowd.
Dealing with the conflicting demands of sprawling bloat,
short-term investors, regulators, unions, and entrenched
bureaucracy is not only hard to do, but it’s hard to even
recognize the severity of the problems until you’re the one
dealing with them. Immelt’s successor, who lasted 14
months, learned this as well.
Most things are harder in practice than they are in theory.
Sometimes this is because we’re overconfident. More often
it’s because we’re not good at identifying what the price of
success is, which prevents us from being able to pay it.
The S&P 500 increased 119-fold in the 50 years ending
2018. All you had to do was sit back and let your money
compound. But, of course, successful investing looks easy
when you’re not the one doing it.
“Hold stocks for the long run,” you’ll hear. It’s good advice.
But do you know how hard it is to maintain a long-term
outlook when stocks are collapsing?
Like everything else worthwhile, successful investing
demands a price. But its currency is not dollars and cents.
It’s volatility, fear, doubt, uncertainty, and regret—all of
which are easy to overlook until you’re dealing with them in
real time.

[PAGE 166]
The inability to recognize that investing has a price can
tempt us to try to get something for nothing. Which, like
shoplifting, rarely ends well.
Say you want a new car. It costs $30,000. You have three
options: 1) Pay $30,000 for it, 2) find a cheaper used one, or
3) steal it. In this case, 99% of people know to avoid the
third option, because the consequences of stealing a car
outweigh the upside.
But say you want to earn an 11% annual return over the
next 30 years so you can retire in peace. Does this reward
come free? Of course not. The world is never that nice.
There’s a price tag, a bill that must be paid. In this case it’s
a never-ending taunt from the market, which gives big
returns and takes them away just as fast. Including
dividends the Dow Jones Industrial Average returned about
11% per year from 1950 to 2019, which is great. But the
price of success during this period was dreadfully high. The
shaded lines in the chart show when it was at least 5%
below its previous all-time high.

[PAGE 167]
This is the price of market returns. The fee. It is the cost of
admission. And it hurts.
Like most products, the bigger the returns, the higher the
price. Netflix stock returned more than 35,000% from 2002
to 2018, but traded below its previous all-time high on 94%
of days. Monster Beverage returned 319,000% from 1995 to
2018—among the highest returns in history—but traded
below its previous high 95% of the time during that period.
Now here’s the important part. Like the car, you have a few
options: You can pay this price, accepting volatility and
upheaval. Or you can find an asset with less uncertainty and
a lower payoff, the equivalent of a used car. Or you can

[PAGE 168]
attempt the equivalent of grand-theft auto: Try to get the
return while avoiding the volatility that comes along with it.
Many people in investing choose the third option. Like a car
thief—though well-meaning and law-abiding—they form
tricks and strategies to get the return without paying the
price. They trade in and out. They attempt to sell before the
next recession and buy before the next boom. Most investors
with even a little experience know that volatility is real and
common. Many then take what seems like the next logical
step: trying to avoid it.
But the Money Gods do not look highly upon those who seek
a reward without paying the price. Some car thieves will get
away with it. Many more will be caught and punished.
Same thing with investing.
Morningstar once looked at the performance of tactical
mutual funds, whose strategy is to switch between stocks
and bonds at opportune times, capturing market returns
with lower downside risk.⁵⁰ They want the returns without
paying the price. The study focused on the mid-2010
through late 2011 period, when U.S. stock markets went
wild on fears of a new recession and the S&P 500 declined
more than 20%. This is the exact kind of environment the
tactical funds are supposed to work in. It was their moment
to shine.
There were, by Morningstar’s count, 112 tactical mutual
funds during this period. Only nine had better risk-adjusted
returns than a simple 60/40 stock-bond fund. Less than a
quarter of the tactical funds had smaller maximum
drawdowns than the leave-it-alone index. Morningstar
wrote: “With a few exceptions, [tactical funds] gained less,

[PAGE 169]
were more volatile, or were subject to just as much
downside risk” as the hands-off fund.
Individual investors fall for this when making their own
investments, too. The average equity fund investor
underperformed the funds they invested in by half a percent
per year, according to Morningstar—the result of buying and
selling when they should have just bought and held.⁵¹
The irony is that by trying to avoid the price, investors end
up paying double.
Back to GE. One of its many faults stems from an era under
former CEO Jack Welch. Welch became famous for ensuring
quarterly earnings per share beat Wall Street estimates. He
was the grandmaster. If Wall Street analysts expected $0.25
per share, Jack would deliver $0.26 no matter the state of
business or the economy. He’d do that by massaging the
numbers—that description is charitable—often pulling gains
from future quarters into the current quarter to make the
obedient numbers salute their master.
Forbes reported one of dozens of examples: “[General
Electric] for two years in a row ‘sold’ locomotives to
unnamed financial partners instead of end users in
transactions that left most of the risks of ownership with
GE.”⁵²
Welch never denied this game. He wrote in his book Straight
From the Gut:
The response of our business leaders to the crises was
typical of the GE culture. Even though the books had closed
on the quarter, many immediately offered to pitch in to
cover the [earnings] gap. Some said they could find an extra

[PAGE 170]
$10 million, $20 million, and even $30 million from their
business to offset the surprise.
The result was that under Welch’s leadership, stockholders
didn’t have to pay the price. They got consistency and
predictability—a stock that surged year after year without
the surprises of uncertainty. Then the bill came due, like it
always does. GE shareholders have suffered through a
decade of mammoth losses that were previously shielded by
accounting maneuvers. The penny gains of Welch’s era
became dime losses today.
The strangest example of this comes from failed mortgage
giants Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, which in the early
2000s were caught under-reporting current earnings by
billions of dollars with the intention of spreading those gains
out over future periods to give investors the illusion of
smoothness and predictability.⁵³ The illusion of not having to
pay the price.
The question is: Why do so many people who are willing to
pay the price of cars, houses, food, and vacations try so hard
to avoid paying the price of good investment returns?
The answer is simple: The price of investing success is not
immediately obvious. It’s not a price tag you can see, so
when the bill comes due it doesn’t feel like a fee for getting
something good. It feels like a fine for doing something
wrong. And while people are generally fine with paying fees,
fines are supposed to be avoided. You’re supposed to make
decisions that preempt and avoid fines. Traffic fines and IRS
fines mean you did something wrong and deserve to be

[PAGE 171]
punished. The natural response for anyone who watches
their wealth decline and views that drop as a fine is to avoid
future fines.
It sounds trivial, but thinking of market volatility as a fee
rather than a fine is an important part of developing the
kind of mindset that lets you stick around long enough for
investing gains to work in your favor.
Few investors have the disposition to say, “I’m actually fine
if I lose 20% of my money.” This is doubly true for new
investors who have never experienced a 20% decline.
But if you view volatility as a fee, things look different.
Disneyland tickets cost $100. But you get an awesome day
with your kids you’ll never forget. Last year more than 18
million people thought that fee was worth paying. Few felt
the $100 was a punishment or a fine. The worthwhile
tradeoff of fees is obvious when it’s clear you’re paying one.
Same with investing, where volatility is almost always a fee,
not a fine.
Market returns are never free and never will be. They
demand you pay a price, like any other product. You’re not
forced to pay this fee, just like you’re not forced to go to
Disneyland. You can go to the local county fair where tickets
might be $10, or stay home for free. You might still have a
good time. But you’ll usually get what you pay for. Same
with markets. The volatility/uncertainty fee—the price of
returns—is the cost of admission to get returns greater than
low-fee parks like cash and bonds.
The trick is convincing yourself that the market’s fee is
worth it. That’s the only way to properly deal with volatility

[PAGE 172]
and uncertainty—not just putting up with it, but realizing
that it’s an admission fee worth paying.
There’s no guarantee that it will be. Sometimes it rains at
Disneyland.
But if you view the admission fee as a fine, you’ll never enjoy
the magic.
Find the price, then pay it.

[PAGE 173]


[PAGE 174]
The implosion of the dot-com bubble in the early 2000s
reduced household wealth by $6.2 trillion.
The end of the housing bubble cut away more than $8
trillion.
It’s hard to overstate how socially devastating financial
bubbles can be. They ruin lives.
Why do these things happen?
And why do they keep happening?
Why can’t we learn our lessons?
The common answer here is that people are greedy, and
greed is an indelible feature of human nature.
That may be true, and it’s a good enough answer for most.
But remember from