FULL_TEXT

[PAGE 1]


[PAGE 2]


[PAGE 3]
PENGUIN BOOKS
THE ART OF SEDUCTION
Robert Greene, author of The 48 Laws of Power, has a
degree in classical literature. He lives in Los Angeles.
Visit his Web site: www.seductionbook.com
Joost Elffers is the producer of Viking Studio's best-
selling The Secret Language of Birthdays, The Secret
Language of Relationships, as well as Play with Your Food.
He lives in New York City.

[PAGE 4]


[PAGE 5]
the art of eduction
Robert Greene
A Joost Elffers Book
PENGUIN BOOKS

[PAGE 6]
PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell,Victoria 3124, Australia
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre,
Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads,
Albany, Auckland, New Zealand
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin,
a member of Penguin Putnam Inc. 2001
Published in Penguin Books 2003
1 3 5 79 10 8 6 42
Copyright © Robert Greene and Joost Elffers, 2001
All rights reserved
Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders. The publisher apologizes
for any errors or omissions in the list that follows and would be grateful to be
notified of any corrections that should appear in any reprint.
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGUED THE HARDCOVER EDITION AS FOLLOWS:
Greene Robert.
The art of seduction / Robert Greene.
p. cm.
"A Joost Elffers book."
ISBN 0-670-89192-4 (hc.)
ISBN 0 14 20.0119 8 (pbk.)
1. Sexual excitement. 2. Sex instruction. 3. Seduction. I.Title.
HQ31 .G82 2001
306.7—dc21
2001025868
Printed in the United States of America
Set in Bembo
Designed by Jaye Zimet with Joost Elffers
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise
circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other
than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including
this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any
other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law.
Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage
electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the author's rights is appreciated.

[PAGE 7]
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint excerpts from the following copyrighted works:
Falling in Love by Francesco Alberoni, translated by Lawrence Venuti. Reprinted by permission of
Random House, Inc.
Seduction by Jean Baudrillard, translated by Brian Singer. St. Martin's Press, 1990. Copyright © New
World Perspectives. 1990. Reprinted by permission of Palgrave.
The Decameron by Giovanni Boccaccio, translated by G. H. McWilliam (Penguin Classics 1972, second
edition 1995). Copyright © G. H. McWilliam, 1972, 1995. Reprinted by permission of Penguin
Books Ltd.
Warhol by David Bourdon, published by Harry N. Abrams, Inc., New York. All rights reserved.
Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Behind the Mask: On Sexual Demons, Sacred Mothers, Transvestites, Gangsters and Other Japanese Cultural
Heroes by Ian Buruma, Random blouse UK, 1984. Reprinted with permission.
Andreas Capcllanus on Love by Andreas Capellanus. translated by P. G. Walsh. Reprinted by permission
of Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd.
The Book of the Courtier by Baldassare Castiglione, translated by George Bull (Penguin Classics 1967,
revised edition 1976). Copyright © George Bull, 1967, 1976. Reprinted by permission of Penguin
Books Ltd.
Portrait of a Seductress: The World of Natalie Barney by Jean Chalon, translated by Carol Barko, Crown
Publishers, Inc., 1979. Reprinted with permission.
Lenin: The Man Behind the Mask by Ronald W. Clark, Faber & Faber Ltd., 1988. Reprinted with
permission.
Pursuit of the Millennium by Norman Cohn. Copyright © 1970 by Oxford University Press. Used by
permission of Oxford University Press, Inc.
Tales from The Thousand and One Nights, translated by N. J. Dawood (Penguin Classics, 1955, revised
edition 1973). Translation copyright © N. J. Dawood. 1954, 1973. Reprinted by permission of
Penguin Books Ltd.
Emma, Lady Hamilton by Flora Fraser, Alfred A. Knopf, 1987. Copyright © 1986 by Flora Fraser.
Reprinted by permission.
Evita: The Real Life of Eva Peron by Nicolas Fraser and Marysa Navarro, W. W Norton & Company,
Inc., 1996. Reprinted by permission.
The World's Lure: Fair Women, Their Loves, Their Power, Their Fates by Alexander von
Gleichen-Russwurm. translated by Hannah Waller, Alfred A. Knopf, 1927. Copyright 1927 by
Alfred A. Knopf. Inc. Reprinted with permission.
The Greek Myths by Robert Graves. Reprinted by permission of Carcanet Press Limited.
The Kennedy Obsession: The American Myth of JFK by John Hellman, Columbia University Press 1997.
Reprinted by permission of Columbia University Press.
The Odyssey by Homer, translated by E. V Rieu (Penguin Classics, 1946). Copyright © The Estate of
E. V. Rieu, 1946. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Life of an Amorous Woman and Other Writings by Ihara Saikaku, translated by Ivan Morris.
Copyright © 1963 by New Directions Publishing Corp. Reprinted by permission of New Directions
Publishing Corp.
"The Seducer's Diary" from Either/Or, Part 1 by Søren Kierkegaard, translated by Howard V. Hong and
Edna H. Hong. Copyright © 1987 by Princeton University Press. Reprinted by permission of
Princeton University Press.
Sirens: Symbols of Seduction by Meri Lao, translated by John Oliphant of Rossie, Park Street Press,
Rochester. Vermont, 1998. Reprinted with permission.
Lives of the Courtesans by Lynne Lawner, Rizzoli, 1987. Reprinted with permission of the author.
The Theatre of Don Juan: A Collection of Plays and Views, 1630-1963 edited with a commentary by
Oscar Mandel. Copyright © 1963 by the University of Nebraska Press. Copyright © renewed 1991 by
the University of Nebraska Press. Reprinted by permission of the University of Nebraska Press.
Don Juan and the Point of Horror by James Mandrell. Reprinted with permission of
Penn State University Press.
Bel-Ami by Guy de Maupassant, translated by Douglas Parmee (Penguin Classics, 1975). Copyright ©
Douglas Parmee. 1975. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Arts and Secrets of Beauty by Lola Montez, Chelsea House, 1969. Used with permission.
The Age of the Crowd by Serge Moscovici. Reprinted with permission ot Cambridge University Press.
The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu, translated by Edward G. Seidensncker, Alfred A. Knopf, 1976.
Copyright © 1976 by Edward G. Seidensticker. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Erotic Poems by Ovid, translated by Peter Green (Penguin Classics, 1982). Copyright © Peter
Green, 1982. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Metamorphoses by Ovid, translated by Mary M. Innes (Penguin Classics, 1955). Copyright ©
Mary M. Innes, 1955. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.

[PAGE 8]
My Sister, My Spouse: A Biography of Lou Andreas-Salomé by H. F. Peters, W. W. Norton & Company,
Inc., 1962. Reprinted with permission.
The. Symposium by Plato, translated by Walter Hamilton (Penguin Classics, 1951). Copyright © Walter
Hamilton. 1951. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Rise and Fall of Athens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert (Penguin
Classics, 1960). Copyright © Ian Scott-Kilvert, 1960. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Hooks Ltd.
Love Declared by Denis de Rougemont, translated by Richard Howard. Reprinted by permission of
Random House, Inc.
The Wisdom of Life and Counsels and Maxims by Arthur Schopenhauer, translated by T. Bailey Saunders
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995). Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon by Sei Shonagon, translated and edited by Ivan Morris, Columbia
University Press. 1991. Reprinted by permission of Columbia University Press.
Liaison by Joyce Wadler, published by Bantam Books, 1993. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Max Weber: Essays in Sociology by Max Weber, edited and translated by H. H. Certh and C. Wright
Mills. Copyright 1946, 1958 by H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills. Used by permission of Oxford
University Press, Inc.
The Game of Hearts: Harriette Wilson & Her Memoirs edited by Lesley Blanch. Copyright © 1955 by
Lesley Blanch. Reprinted with permission of Simon & Schuster.

[PAGE 9]
To the memory of my father

[PAGE 10]
Acknowledgments
First, I would like to thank Anna Biller for her countless contributions to
this book: the research, the many discussions, her invaluable help with the
text itself, and, last but not least, her knowledge of the art of seduction, of
which I have been the happy victim on numerous occasions.
I must thank my mother, Laurette, for supporting me so steadfastly
throughout this project and for being my most devoted fan.
I would like to thank Catherine Léouzon, who some years ago intro-
duced me to Les Liaisons Dangereuses and the world of Valmont.
I would like to thank David Frankel, for his deft editing and for his
much-appreciated advice; Molly Stern at Viking Penguin, for overseeing
the project and helping to shape it; Radha Pancham, for keeping it all orga-
nized and being so patient; and Brett Kelly, for moving things along.
With heavy heart I would like to pay tribute to my cat Boris, who for
thirteen years watched over me as I wrote and whose presence is sorely
missed. His successor, Brutus, has proven to be a worthy muse.
Finally, I would like to honor my father. Words cannot express how
much I miss him and how much he has inspired my work.
iX

[PAGE 11]
Contents
Acknowlegments • ix
Preface • xix
Part One
The Seductive Character page 1
The Siren page 5
A man is often secretly oppressed by the role he has to play—by always having to be responsi-
ble, in control, and rational. The Siren is the ultimate male fantasy figure because she offers a
total release from the limitations of his life. In her presence, which is always heightened and
sexually charged, the male feels transported to a realm of pure pleasure. In a world where
women are often too timid to project such an image, learn to take control of the male libido by
embodying his fantasy.
The Rake page 17
A woman never quite feels desired and appreciated enough. She wants attention, but a man is
too often distracted and unresponsive. The Rake is a great female fantasy-figure—when he de-
sires a woman, brief though that moment may be, he will go to the ends of the earth for her.
He may be disloyal, dishonest, and amoral, but that only adds to his appeal. Stir a woman's
repressed longings by adapting the Rake's mix of danger and pleasure.
The Ideal Lover page 29
Most people have dreams in their youth that get shattered or worn down with age. They find
themselves disappointed by people, events, reality, which cannot match their youthful ideals.
Ideal Lovers thrive on people's broken dreams, which become lifelong fantasies. You long for ro-
mance? Adventure? Lofty spiritual communion? The Ideal Lover reflects your fantasy. He or
she is an artist in creating the illusion you require. In a world of disenchantment and baseness,
there is limitless seductive power in following the path of the Ideal Lover.
xi

[PAGE 12]
xii • Contents
The Dandy page 41
Most of us feel trapped within the limited roles that the world expects us to play. We are in-
stantly attracted to those who are more fluid than we are—those who create their own persona.
Dandies excite us because they cannot be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for our-
selves. They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their own physical image,
which is always startling. Use the power of the Dandy to create an ambiguous, alluring pres-
ence that stirs repressed desires.
The Natural page 53
Childhood is the golden paradise we are always consciously or unconsciously trying to re-create.
The Natural embodies the longed-for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease, caught up in their playful spirit,
transported back to that golden age. Adopt the pose of the Natural to neutralize people's
defensivencss and infect them with helpless delight.
The Coquette page 67
The ability to delay satisfaction is the ultimate art of seduction—while waiting, the victim is
held in thrall. Coquettes are the grand masters of the game, orchestrating a back-and-forth
movement between hope and frustration. They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of
physical pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which, however, proves elu-
sive; yet this only makes their targets pursue them the more. Imitate the alternating heat and
coolness of the Coquette and you will keep the seduced at your heels.
The Charmer page 79
Charm is seduction without sex. Charmers are consummate manipulators, masking their clev-
erness by creating a mood of pleasure and comfort. Their method is simple: They deflect atten-
tion from themselves and focus it on their target. They understand your spirit, feel your pain,
adapt to your moods. In the presence of a Charmer you feel better about yourself. Learn to cast
the Charmer's spell by aiming at people's primary weaknesses: vanity and self-esteem.
The Charismatic page 95
Charisma is a presence that excites us. It comes from an inner quality—self-confidence, sexual
energy, sense of purpose, contentment—that most people lack and want. This quality radiates
outward, permeating the gestures of Charismatics, making them seem extraordinary and supe-
rior. They learn to heighten their charisma with a piercing gaze, fiery oratory, an air of mys-
tery. Create the charismatic illusion by radiating intensity while remaining detached.
The Star page 119
Daily life is harsh, and most of us constantly seek escape from it in fantasies and dreams. Stars
feed on this weakness; standing out from others through a distinctive and appealing style, they
make us want to watch them. At the same time, they are vague and ethereal, keeping their
distance, and letting us imagine more than is there. Their dreamlike quality works on our un-
conscious. Learn to become an object of fascination by projecting the glittering but elusive pres-
ence of the Star.

[PAGE 13]
Contents • xiii
The Anti-Seducer page 131
Seducers draw you in by the focused, individualized attention they pay to you. Anti-seducers
are the opposite: insecure, self-absorbed, and unable to grasp the psychology of another person,
they literally repel Anti-Seducers have no self-awareness, and never realize when they are
pestering, imposing, talking too much. Root out anti-seductive qualities in yourself and recog-
nize them in others—there is no pleasure or profit in dealing with the Anti-Seducer.
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types page 147
Part Two
The Seductive Process page 161
Phase One: Separation—Stirring Interest and Desire
1 Choose the Right Victim page 167
Everything depends on the target of your seduction. Study your prey thoroughly, and choose
only those who will prove susceptible to your charms. The right victims are those for whom you
can fill a void, who see in you something exotic. They are often isolated or unhappy, or can
easily be made so—for the completely contented person is almost impossible to seduce. The
perfect victim has some quality that inspires strong emotions in you, making your seductive
maneuvers seem more natural and dynamic. The perfect victim allows for the perfect chase.
2 Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly page 177
If you are too direct early on, you risk stirring up a resistance that will never be lowered. At
first there must be nothing of the seducer in your manner. The seduction should begin at an
angle, indirectly, so that the target only gradually becomes aware of you. Haunt the periphery
of your target's life—approach through a third party, or seem to cultivate a relatively neutral re-
lationship, moving gradually from friend to lover. Lull the target into feeling secure, then strike.
3 Send Mixed Signals page 185
Once people are aware of your presence, and perhaps vaguely intrigued, you need to stir their
interest before it settles on someone else. Most of us are much too obvious—instead, be hard to
figure out. Send mixed signals: both tough and tender, both spiritual and earthly, both inno-
cent and cunning. A mix of qualities suggests depth, which fascinates even as it confuses. An
elusive, enigmatic aura will make people want to know more, drawing them into your circle.
Create such a power by hinting at something contradictory within you.
4 Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles page 195
Few are drawn to the person whom others avoid or neglect; people gather around those who
have already attracted interest. To draw your victims closer and make them hungry to possess
you, you must create an aura of desirability—of being wanted and courted by many. It will
become a point of vanity for them to be the preferred object of your attention, to win you away
from a crowd of admirers. Build a reputation that precedes you: If many have succumbed to
your charms, there must be a reason.

[PAGE 14]
xiv • Contents
5 Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent page 203
A perfectly satisfied person cannot be seduced. Tension and disharmony must be instilled in
your targets minds. Stir within them feelings of discontent, an unhappiness with their circum-
stances and with themselves. The feelings of inadequacy that you create will give you space to
insinuate yourself, to make them see you as the answer to their problems. Pain and anxiety are
the proper precursors to pleasure. Learn to manufacture the need that you can fill.
6 Master the Art of Insinuation page 211
Making your targets feel dissatisfied and in need of your attention is essential, but if you are
too obvious, they will see through you and grow defensive. There is no known defense, how-
ever, against insinuation—the art of planting ideas in people's minds by dropping elusive hints
that take root days later, even appearing to them as their own idea. Create a sublanguage—
bold statements followed by retraction and apology, ambiguous comments, banal talk combined
with alluring glances—that enters the target's unconscious to convey your real meaning. Make
everything suggestive.
7 Enter Their Spirit page 219
Most people are locked in their own worlds, making them stubborn and hard to persuade. The
way to lure them out of their shell and set up your seduction is to enter their spirit. Play by
their rules, enjoy what they enjoy, adapt yourself to their moods. In doing so you will stroke
their deep-rooted narcissism and lower their defenses. Indulge your targets' every mood and
whim, giving them nothing to react against or resist.
8 Create Temptation page 229
Lure the target deep into your seduction by creating the proper temptation: a glimpse of the
pleasures to come. As the serpent tempted Eve with the promise of forbidden knowledge, you
must awaken a desire in your targets that they cannot control. Find that weakness of theirs,
that fantasy that has yet to be realized, and hint that you can lead them toward it. The key is
to keep it vague. Stimulate a curiosity stronger than the doubts and anxieties that go with it,
and they will follow you.
Phase Two: Lead Astray—Creating Pleasure and Confusion
9 Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? page 241
The moment people feel they know what to expect from you, your spell on them is broken.
More: You have ceded them power. The only way to lead the seduced along and keep the up-
per hand is to create suspense, a calculated surprise. Doing something they do not expect from
you will give them a delightful sense of spontaneity—they will not be able to foresee what
comes next. You are always one step ahead and in control. Give the victim a thrill with a sud-
den change of direction.

[PAGE 15]
Contents • xv
10 Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion page 251
It is hard to make people listen; they are consumed with their own thoughts and desires, and
have little time for yours. The trick to making them listen is to say what they want to hear, to
fill their ears with whatever is pleasant to them. This is the essence of seductive language. In-
flame people's emotions with loaded phrases, flatter them, comfort their insecurities, envelop
them in sweet words and promises, and not only will they listen to you, they will lose their
will to resist you.
11 Pay Attention to Detail page 265
Lofty words of love and grand gestures can be suspicious: Why are you trying so hard to
please? The details of a seduction—the subtle gestures, the offhand things you do—are often
more charming and revealing. You must learn to distract your victims with a myriad of pleas-
ant little rituals—thoughtful gifts tailored just for them, clothes and adornments designed to
please them, gestures that show the time and attention you are paying them. Mesmerized by
what they see, they will not notice what you are really up to.
12 Poeticize Your Presence page 277
Important things happen when your targets are alone: The slightest feeling of relief that you
are not there, and it is all over. Familiarity and overexposure will cause this reaction. Remain
elusive, then. Intrigue your targets by alternating an exciting presence with a cool distance,
exuberant moments followed by calculated absences. Associate yourself with poetic images and
objects, so that when they think of you, they begin to see you through an idealized halo. The
more you figure in their minds, the more they will envelop you in seductive fantasies.
13 Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability page 285
Too much maneuvering on your part may raise suspicion. The best way to cover your tracks is
to make the other person feel superior and stronger. If you seem to be weak, vulnerable, en-
thralled by the other person, and unable to control yourself you will make your actions look
more natural, less calculated. Physical weakness—tears, bashfulness, paleness—will help cre-
ate the effect. Play the victim, then transform your target's sympathy into love.
14 Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion page 295
To compensate for the difficulties in their lives, people spend a lot of their time daydreaming,
imagining a future full of adventure, success, and romance. If you can create the illusion that
through you they can live out their dreams, you will have them at your mercy. Aim at secret
wishes that have been thwarted or repressed, stirring up uncontrollable emotions, clouding their
powers of reason. Lead the seduced to a point of confusion in which they can no longer tell the
difference between illusion and reality.
15 Isolate the Victim page 309
An isolated person is weak. By slowly isolating your victims, you make them more vulnerable
to your influence. Take them away from their normal milieu, friends, family, home. Give them
the sense of being marginalized, in limbo—they are leaving one world behind and entering
another. Once isolated like this, they have no outside support, and in their confusion they are
easily led astray. Lure the seduced into your lair, where nothing is familiar.

[PAGE 16]
xvi • Contents
Phase Three: The Precipice—Deepening the Effect Through Extreme Measures
16 Prove Yourself page 321
Most people want to be seduced. If they resist your efforts, it is probably because you ham' not
gone far enough to allay their doubts—about your motives, the depth of your feelings, and so
on. One well-timed action that shows how far you are willing to go to win them over will dis-
pel their doubts. Do not worry about looking foolish or making a mistake—any kind of deed
that is self-sacrificing and for your targets' sake will so overwhelm their emotions, they won't
notice anything else.
17 Effect a Regression page 333
People who have experienced a certain kind of pleasure in the past will try to repeat or relive
it. The deepest-rooted and most pleasurable memories are usually those from earliest child-
hood, and are often unconsciously associated with a parental figure. Bring your targets back to
that point by placing yourself in the oedipal triangle and positioning them as the needy child.
Unaware of the cause of their emotional response, they will fall in love with you.
18 Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo page 349
There are always social limits on what one can do. Some of these, the most elemental taboos,
go back centuries; others are more superficial, simply defining polite and acceptable behavior.
Making your targets feel that you are leading them past either kind of limit is immensely se-
ductive. People yearn to explore their dark side. Once the desire to transgress draws your tar-
gets to you, it will be hard for them to stop. Take them farther than they imagined—the
shared feeling of guilt and complicity will create a powerful bond.
19 Use Spiritual Lures page 359
Everyone has doubts and insecurities—about their body, their self-worth, their sexuality. If
your seduction appeals exclusively to the physical, you will stir up these doubts and make your
targets self-conscious. Instead, lure them out of their insecurities by making them focus on
something sublime and spiritual: a religious experience, a lofty work of art, the occult. Lost in
a spiritual mist, the target will feel light and uninhibited. Deepen the effect of your seduction
by making its sexual culmination seem like the spiritual union of two souls.
20 Mix Pleasure with Pain page 369
The greatest mistake in seduction is being too nice. At first, perhaps, your kindness is charm-
ing, but it soon grows monotonous; you are trying too hard to please, and seem insecure. In-
stead of overwhelming your targets with niceness, try inflicting some pain. Make them feel
guilty and insecure. Instigate a breakup—now a rapprochement, a return to your earlier kind-
ness, will turn them weak at the knees. The lower the lows you create, the greater the highs.
To heighten the erotic charge, create the excitement of fear.

[PAGE 17]
Contents • xvii
Phase Four: Moving In for the Kill
21 Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued page 383
If your targets become too used to you as the aggressor, they will give less of their own energy,
and the tension will slacken. You need to wake them up, turn the tables. Once they are under
your spell, take a step bach and they will start to come after you. Hint that you are growing
bored. Seem interested in someone else. Soon they will want to possess you physically, and re-
straint will go out the window. Create the illusion that the seducer is being seduced.
22 Use Physical Lures page 393
Targets with active minds are dangerous: If they see through your manipulations, they may
suddenly develop doubts. Put their minds gently to rest, and waken their dormant senses, by
combining a nondefensive attitude with a charged sexual presence. While your cool, noncha-
lant air is lowering their inhibitions, your glances, voice, and bearing—oozing sex and
desire—are getting under their skin and raising their temperature. Never force the physical;
instead infect your targets with heat, lure them into lust. Morality, judgment, and concern for
the future will all melt away.
23 Master the Art of the Bold Move page 405
A moment has arrived: Your victim clearly desires you, but is not ready to admit it openly, let
alone act on it. This is the time to throw aside chivalry, kindness, and coquetry and to over-
whelm with a bold move. Don't give the victim time to consider the consequences. Showing
hesitation or awkwardness means you are thinking of yourself as opposed to being over-
whelmed by the victim's charms. One person must go on the offensive, and it is you.
24 Beware the Aftereffects page 415
Danger follows in the aftermath of a successful seduction. After emotions have reached a pitch,
they often swing in the opposite direction—toward lassitude, distrust, disappointment. If you
are to part, make the sacrifice swift and sudden. If you are to stay in a relationship, beware a
flagging of energy, a creeping familiarity that will spoil the fantasy. A second seduction is re-
quired. Never let the other person take you for granted—use absence, create pain and conflict,
to keep the seduced on tenterhooks.
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time page 431
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses page 441
Selected Bibliography • 455
Index • 457

[PAGE 18]


[PAGE 19]
Preface
Thousands of years ago, power was mostly gained through physical vio-
lence and maintained with brute strength. There was little need for
subtlety—a king or emperor had to be merciless. Only a select few had
power, but no one suffered under this scheme of things more than women.
They had no way to compete, no weapon at their disposal that could make
a man do what they wanted—politically, socially, or even in the home.
Oppression and scorn,
Of course men had one weakness: their insatiable desire for sex. A thus, were and must have
woman could always toy with this desire, but once she gave in to sex the been generally the share of
women in emerging
man was back in control; and if she withheld sex, he could simply look
societies; this state lasted in
elsewhere—or exert force. What good was a power that was so temporary all its force until centuries
and frail? Yet women had no choice but to submit to this condition. There of experience taught them
to substitute skill for force.
were some, though, whose hunger for power was too great, and who, over
Women at last sensed that,
the years, through much cleverness and creativity, invented a way of turn- since they were weaker,
ing the dynamic around, creating a more lasting and effective form of their only resource was to
seduce; they understood
power.
that if they were dependent
These women—among them Bathsheba, from the Old Testament; on men through force, men
Helen of Troy; the Chinese siren Hsi Shi; and the greatest of them all, could become dependent on
them through pleasure.
Cleopatra—invented seduction. First they would draw a man in with an al-
More unhappy than men,
luring appearance, designing their makeup and adornment to fashion the
they must have thought
image of a goddess come to life. By showing only glimpses of flesh, they and reflected earlier than
would tease a man's imagination, stimulating the desire not just for sex but did men; they were the first
to know that pleasure was
for something greater: the chance to possess a fantasy figure. Once they had
always beneath the idea
their victims' interest, these women would lure them away from the mascu- that one formed of it, and
line world of war and politics and get them to spend time in the feminine that the imagination went
farther than nature. Once
world—a world of luxury, spectacle, and pleasure. They might also lead
these basic truths were
them astray literally, taking them on a journey, as Cleopatra lured Julius known, they learned first
Caesar on a trip down the Nile. Men would grow hooked on these refined, to veil their charms in order
to awaken curiosity; they
sensual pleasures—they would fall in love. But then, invariably, the women
practiced the difficult art of
would turn cold and indifferent, confusing their victims. Just when the
refusing even as they
men wanted more, they found their pleasures withdrawn. They would be wished to consent; from
forced into pursuit, trying anything to win back the favors they once had that moment on, they
knew how to set men's
tasted and growing weak and emotional in the process. Men who had
imagination afire, they
physical force and all the social power—men like King David, the Trojan knew how to arouse and
Paris, Julius Caesar, Mark Antony, King Fu Chai—would find themselves direct desires as they
pleased: thus did beauty
becoming the slave of a woman.
and love come into being;
In the face of violence and brutality, these women made seduction a now the lot of women

[PAGE 20]
xx • Preface
became less harsh, not that sophisticated art, the ultimate form of power and persuasion. They learned
they had managed to to work on the mind first, stimulating fantasies, keeping a man wanting
liberate themselves entirely
more, creating patterns of hope and despair—the essence of seduction.
from the state of oppression
to which their weakness Their power was not physical but psychological, not forceful but indirect
condemned them; but, in and cunning. These first great seductresses were like military generals plan-
the state of perpetual war
ning the destruction of an enemy, and indeed early accounts of seduction
that continues to exist
often compare it to battle, the feminine version of warfare. For Cleopatra,
between women and men,
one has seen them, with it was a means of consolidating an empire. In seduction, the woman was no
the help of the caresses they longer a passive sex object; she had become an active agent, a figure of
have been able to invent,
power.
combat ceaselessly,
sometimes vanquish, and With a few exceptions—the Latin poet Ovid, the medieval
often more skillfully take troubadours—men did not much concern themselves with such a frivolous
advantage of the forces
art as seduction. Then, in the seventeenth century came a great change:
directed against them;
sometimes, too, men have men grew interested in seduction as a way to overcome a young woman's
turned against women resistance to sex. History's first great male seducers—the Duke de Lauzun,
these weapons the women
the different Spaniards who inspired the Don Juan legend—began to adopt
had forged to combat them,
the methods traditionally employed by women. They learned to dazzle
and their slavery has
become all the harsher with their appearance (often androgynous in nature), to stimulate the
for it. imagination, to play the coquette. They also added a new, masculine ele-
—CHODERLOS DE LACLOS, ON ment to the game: seductive language, for they had discovered a woman's
THE EDUCATION OF WOMEN, weakness for soft words. These two forms of seduction—the feminine use
TRANSLATED BY LYDIA DAVIS, IN
of appearances and the masculine use of language—would often cross
THE LIBERTINE READER,
EDITED BY MICHAEL FEHER gender lines: Casanova would dazzle a woman with his clothes; Ninon
de l'Enclos would charm a man with her words.
At the same time that men were developing their version of seduction,
Much more genius is others began to adapt the art for social purposes. As Europe's feudal system
needed to make love than
of government faded into the past, courtiers needed to get their way in
to command armies.
court without the use of force. They learned the power to be gained by se-
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
ducing their superiors and competitors through psychological games, soft
words, a little coquetry. As culture became democratized, actors, dandies,
and artists came to use the tactics of seduction as a way to charm and win
Menelaus, if you are really
going to kill her, \ Then over their audience and social milieu. In the nineteenth century another
my blessing go with you, great change occurred: politicians like Napoleon consciously saw them-
but you must do it now, \
selves as seducers, on a grand scale. These men depended on the art of se-
Before her looks so twist
the strings of your heart \ ductive oratory, but they also mastered what had once been feminine
That they turn your mind; strategies: staging vast spectacles, using theatrical devices, creating a charged
for her eyes are like armies, physical presence. All this, they learned, was the essence of charisma—and
\And where her glances
remains so today. By seducing the masses they could accumulate immense
fall, there cities burn, \
Until the dust of their power without the use of force.
ashes is blown \ By her Today we have reached the ultimate point in the evolution of seduc-
sighs. I know her,
tion. Now more than ever, force or brutality of any kind is discouraged. All
Men elans, \ And so do
you. And all those who areas of social life require the ability to persuade people in a way that does
know her suffer. not offend or impose itself. Forms of seduction can be found everywhere,
—HECUBA SPEAKING ABOUT blending male and female strategies. Advertisements insinuate, the soft sell
HELEN OF TROY IN EURIPIDES, dominates. If we are to change people's opinions—and affecting opinion is
THE TROJAN WOMEN,
basic to seduction—we must act in subtle, subliminal ways. Today no politi-
TRANSLATED BY NEIL CURRY

[PAGE 21]
Preface • xxi
cal campaign can work without seduction. Since the era of John F. No man hath it in his
Kennedy, political figures are required to have a degree of charisma, a fasci- power to over-rule the
deceitfulness of a woman.
nating presence to keep their audience's attention, which is half the battle.
The film world and media create a galaxy of seductive stars and images. We —MARGUERITE OF NAVARRE
are saturated in the seductive. But even if much has changed in degree and
scope, the essence of seduction is constant: never be forceful or direct; in-
stead, use pleasure as bait, playing on people's emotions, stirring desire and This important side-track,
by which woman succeeded
confusion, inducing psychological surrender. In seduction as it is practiced
in evading man's strength
today, the methods of Cleopatra still hold. and establishing herself in
power, has not been given
due consideration by
People are constantly trying to influence us, to tell us what to do, and just
historians. From the
as often we tune them out, resisting their attempts at persuasion. There is a moment when the woman
moment in our lives, however, when we all act differently—when we are in detached herself from the
crowd, an individual
love. We fall under a kind of spell. Our minds are usually preoccupied with
finished product, offering
our own concerns; now they become filled with thoughts of the loved one.
delights which could not be
We grow emotional, lose the ability to think straight, act in foolish ways obtained by force, but only
that we would never do otherwise. If this goes on long enough something by flattery .... the reign
of love's priestesses was
inside us gives way: we surrender to the will of the loved one, and to our
inaugurated. It was a
desire to possess them. development of far-reaching
Seducers are people who understand the tremendous power contained importance in the history of
civilization. . . . Only by
in such moments of surrender. They analyze what happens when people
the circuitous route of the
are in love, study the psychological components of the process—what spurs art of love could woman
the imagination, what casts a spell. By instinct and through practice they again assert authority, and
this she did by asserting
master the art of making people fall in love. As the first seductresses knew,
herself at the very point at
it is much more effective to create love than lust. A person in love is emo- which she would normally
tional, pliable, and easily misled. (The origin of the word "seduction" is the be a slave at the man's
Latin for "to lead astray") A person in lust is harder to control and, once mercy. She had discovered
the might of lust, the secret
satisfied, may easily leave you. Seducers take their time, create enchantment
of the art of love, the
and the bonds of love, so that when sex ensues it only further enslaves daemonic power of a
the victim. Creating love and enchantment becomes the model for all passion artificially aroused
and never satiated. The
seductions—sexual, social, political. A person in love will surrender.
force tints unchained was
It is pointless to try to argue against such power, to imagine that you are thenceforth to count among
not interested in it, or that it is evil and ugly. The harder you try to resist the most tremendous of the
world's forces and at
the lure of seduction—as an idea, as a form of power—the more you will
moments to have power
find yourself fascinated. The reason is simple: most of us have known the even over life and death. . . .
power of having someone fall in love with us. Our actions, gestures, the • The deliberate spell-
binding of man's senses
things we say, all have positive effects on this person; we may not com-
was to have a magical effect
pletely understand what we have done right, but this feeling of power is in-
upon him, opening up an
toxicating. It gives us confidence, which makes us more seductive. We may infinitely wider range of
also experience this in a social or work setting—one day we are in an ele- sensation and spurring him
on as if impelled by an
vated mood and people seem more responsive, more charmed by us. These
inspired dream.
moments of power are fleeting, but they resonate in the memory with
—ALEXANDER VON GLEICHEN-
great intensity. We want them back. Nobody likes to feel awkward or timid
RUSSWURM, THE WORLD'S
or unable to reach people. The siren call of seduction is irresistible because LURE, TRANSLATED BY HANNAH
WALLER
power is irresistible, and nothing will bring you more power in the modern
world than the ability to seduce. Repressing the desire to seduce is a kind of

[PAGE 22]
xxii • Preface
The first thing to get in hysterical reaction, revealing your deep-down fascination with the process;
your head is that every you are only making your desires stronger. Some day they will come to the
single \ Girl can be
surface.
caught—and that you'll
catch her if \ You set your To have such power does not require a total transformation in your
toils right. Birds will character or any kind of physical improvement in your looks. Seduction is a
sooner fall dumb in \ game of psychology, not beauty, and it is within the grasp of any person to
Springtime, \ Cicadas in
become a master at the game. All that is required is that you look at the
summer, or a hunting-dog \
Turn his back on a hare, world differently, through the eyes of a seducer.
than a lover's bland A seducer does not turn the power off and on—every social and per-
inducements \ Can fail
sonal interaction is seen as a potential seduction. There is never a moment
with a woman, Even one
you suppose \ Reluctant to waste. This is so for several reasons. The power seducers have over a man
will want it. or woman works in social environments because they have learned how to
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE, tone down the sexual element without getting rid of it. We may think we
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN see through them, but they are so pleasant to be around anyway that it does
not matter. Trying to divide your life into moments in which you seduce
and others in which you hold back will only confuse and constrain you.
The combination of these Erotic desire and love lurk beneath the surface of almost every human en-
two elements, enchantment
counter; better to give free rein to your skills than to try to use them only
and surrender, is, then,
essential to the love which in the bedroom. (In fact, the seducer sees the world as his or her bedroom.)
we are discussing. . . . This attitude creates great seductive momentum, and with each seduction
What exists in love is
you gain experience and practice. One social or sexual seduction makes the
surrender due to
enchantment. next one easier, your confidence growing and making you more alluring.
People are drawn to you in greater numbers as the seducer's aura descends
—JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET, ON
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY TOBY upon you.
TALBOT Seducers have a warrior's outlook on life. They see each person as a
kind of walled castle to which they are laying siege. Seduction is a process
of penetration: initially penetrating the target's mind, their first point of
What is good?—All that
defense. Once seducers have penetrated the mind, making the target fanta-
heightens the feeling of
size about them, it is easy to lower resistance and create physical surrender.
power, the will to power,
power itself in man. • Seducers do not improvise; they do not leave this process to chance. Like
What is bad?—All that any good general, they plan and strategize, aiming at the target's particular
proceeds from weakness. •
weaknesses.
What is happiness?—The
feeling that power The main obstacle to becoming a seducer is this foolish prejudice we
increases—that a resistance have of seeing love and romance as some kind of sacred, magical realm
is overcome.
where things just fall into place, if they are meant to. This might seem ro-
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, THE mantic and quaint, but it is really just a cover for our laziness. What will se-
ANTI—CHRIST, TRANSLATED BY
duce a person is the effort we expend on their behalf, showing how much
R. J. HOLLINGDALE
we care, how much they are worth. Leaving things to chance is a recipe for
disaster, and reveals that we do not take love and romance very seriously. It
was the effort Casanova expended, the artfulness he applied to each affair
that made him so devilishly seductive. Falling in love is a matter not of
magic but of psychology. Once you understand your target's psychology,
and strategize to suit it, you will be better able to cast a "magical" spell. A
seducer sees love not as sacred but as warfare, where all is fair.
Seducers are never self-absorbed. Their gaze is directed outward, not
inward. When they meet someone their first move is to get inside that per-

[PAGE 23]
Preface • xxiii
son's skin, to see the world through their eyes. The reasons for this are sev- The disaffection, neurosis,
eral. First, self-absorption is a sign of insecurity; it is anti-seductive. Every- anguish and frustration
encountered by
one has insecurities, but seducers manage to ignore them, finding therapy
psychoanalysis comes no
for moments of self-doubt by being absorbed in the world. This gives them doubt from being unable to
a buoyant spirit—we want to be around them. Second, getting into some- love or to be loved, from
being unable to give or take
one's skin, imagining what it is like to be them, helps the seducer gather
pleasure, but the radical
valuable information, learn what makes that person tick, what will make disenchantment comes from
them lose their ability to think straight and fall into a trap. Armed with seduction and its failure.
Only those who lie
such information, they can provide focused and individualized attention—a
completely outside
rare commodity in a world in which most people see us only from behind
seduction are ill, even if
the screen of their own prejudices. Getting into the targets' skin is the first they remain fully capable of
important tactical move in the war of penetration. loving and making love.
Psychoanalysis believes it
Seducers see themselves as providers of pleasure, like bees that gather
treats the disorder of sex
pollen from some flowers and deliver it to others. As children we mostly and desire, but in reality it
devoted our lives to play and pleasure. Adults often have feelings of beingis dealing with the
disorders of seduction. . . .
cut off from this paradise, of being weighed down by responsibilities. The
The most serious
seducer knows that people are waiting for pleasure—they never get enough deficiencies always concern
of it from friends and lovers, and they cannot get it by themselves. A person charm and not pleasure,
enchantment and not some
who enters their lives offering adventure and romance cannot be resisted.
vital or sexual satisfaction.
Pleasure is a feeling of being taken past our limits, of being overwhelmed—
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
by another person, by an experience. People are dying to be overwhelmed,
SEDUCTION
to let go of their usual stubbornness. Sometimes their resistance to us is
a way of saying, Please seduce me. Seducers know that the possibility of
pleasure will make a person follow them, and the experience of it will
Whatever is done from love
make someone open up, weak to the touch. They also train themselves to always occurs beyond good
be sensitive to pleasure, knowing that feeling pleasure themselves will make and evil.
it that much easier for them to infect the people around them. —FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,
A seducer sees all of life as theater, everyone an actor. Most people feelBEYOND GOOD AND EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY WALTER
they have constricted roles in life, which makes them unhappy. Seducers,
KAUFMANN
on the other hand, can be anyone and can assume many roles. (The arche-
type here is the god Zeus, insatiable seducer of young maidens, whose
main weapon was the ability to assume the form of whatever person or ani-
mal would most appeal to his victim.) Seducers take pleasure in performing
and are not weighed down by their identity, or by some need to be them-
selves, or to be natural. This freedom of theirs, this fluidity in body and
spirit, is what makes them attractive. What people lack in life is not more
reality but illusion, fantasy, play. The clothes that seducers wear, the places
they take you to, their words and actions, are slightly heightened—not
overly theatrical but with a delightful edge of unreality, as if the two of you
were living out a piece of fiction or were characters in a film. Seduction is
a kind of theater in real life, the meeting of illusion and reality.
Finally, seducers are completely amoral in their approach to life. It is all
a game, an arena for play. Knowing that the moralists, the crabbed repressed
types who croak about the evils of the seducer, secretly envy their power,
they do not concern themselves with other people's opinions. They do not
deal in moral judgments—nothing could be less seductive. Everything is

[PAGE 24]
xxiv • Preface
Should anyone here in pliant, fluid, like life itself. Seduction is a form of deception, but people
Rome lack finesse at love- want to be led astray, they yearn to be seduced. If they didn't, seducers
making, \ Let him \ Try
would not find so many willing victims. Get rid of any moralizing tenden-
me—read my book, and
cies, adopt the seducer's playful philosophy, and you will find the rest of the
results are guaranteed! \
Technique is the secret. process easy and natural.
Charioteer, sailor,
oarsman, \ All need it.
The Art of Seduction is designed to arm you with weapons of persuasion and
Technique can control \
Love himself. charm, so that those around you will slowly lose their ability to resist with-
out knowing how or why it has happened. It is an art of war for delicate
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN times.
Every seduction has two elements that you must analyze and under-
stand: first, yourself and what is seductive about you; and second, your tar-
get and the actions that will penetrate their defenses and create surrender.
The two sides are equally important. If you strategize without paying at-
tention to the parts of your character that draw people to you, you will be
seen as a mechanical seducer, slimy and manipulative. If you rely on your
seductive personality without paying attention to the other person, you will
make terrible mistakes and limit your potential.
Consequently, The Art of Seduction is divided into two parts. The first
half, "The Seductive Character," describes the nine types of seducer, plus
the Anti-Seducer. Studying these types will make you aware of what is
inherently seductive in your character, the basic building block of any se-
duction. The second half, "The Seductive Process," includes the twenty-
four maneuvers and strategies that will instruct you on how to create a
spell, break down people's resistance, give movement and force to your
seduction, and induce surrender in your target. As a kind of bridge be-
tween the two parts, there is a chapter on the eighteen types of victims of a
seduction—each of them missing something from their lives, each cradling
an emptiness you can fill. Knowing what type you are dealing with will
help you put into practice the ideas in both sections. Ignore any part of this
book and you will be an incomplete seducer.
The ideas and strategies in The Art of Seduction are based on the writings
and historical accounts of the most successful seducers in history. The
sources include the seducers' own memoirs (by Casanova, Errol Flynn, Na-
talie Barney, Marilyn Monroe); biographies (of Cleopatra, Josephine Bona-
parte, John F. Kennedy, Duke Ellington); handbooks on the subject (most
notably Ovid's Art of Love); and fictional accounts of seductions (Choderlos
de Laclos's Dangerous Liaisons, Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary,
Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji). The heroes and heroines of these lit-
erary works are generally modeled on real-life seducers. The strategies they
employ reveal the intimate connection between fiction and seduction, cre-
ating illusion and leading a person along. In putting the book's lessons into
practice, you will be following in the path of the greatest masters of the art.
Finally, the spirit that will make you a consummate seducer is the spirit
in which you should read this book. The French writer Denis Diderot
once wrote, "I give my mind the liberty to follow the first wise or foolish

[PAGE 25]
Preface • xxv
idea that presents itself, just as in the avenue de Foy our dissolute youths
follow close on the heels of some strumpet, then leave her to pursue an-
other, attacking all of them and attaching themselves to none. My thoughts
are my strumpets." He meant that he let himself be seduced by ideas, fol-
lowing whichever one caught his fancy until a better one came along, his
thoughts infused with a kind of sexual excitement. Once you enter these
pages, do as Diderot advised: let yourself be lured by the stories and ideas,
your mind open and your thoughts fluid. Slowly you will find yourself ab-
sorbing the poison through the skin and you will begin to see everything as
a seduction, including the way you think and how you look at the world.
Most virtue is a demand for greater seduction.
—NATALIE BARNEY

[PAGE 26]


[PAGE 27]


[PAGE 28]


[PAGE 29]


[PAGE 30]


[PAGE 31]
We all have the power of attraction—the ability to draw people in and
hold them in our thrall. Far from all of us, though, are aware of this
inner potential, and we imagine attractiveness instead as a near-mystical
trait that a select few are born with and the rest will never command. Yet all
we need to do to realize our potential is understand what it is in a person's
character that naturally excites people and develop these latent qualities
within us.
Successful seductions rarely begin with an obvious maneuver or strate-
gic device. That is certain to arouse suspicion. Successful seductions begin
with your character, your ability to radiate some quality that attracts people
and stirs their emotions in a way that is beyond their control. Hypnotized
by your seductive character, your victims will not notice your subsequent
manipulations. It will then be child's play to mislead and seduce them.
There are nine seducer types in the world. Each type has a particular
character trait that comes from deep within and creates a seductive pull.
Sirens have an abundance of sexual energy and know how to use it. Rakes
insatiably adore the opposite sex, and their desire is infectious. Ideal Lovers
have an aesthetic sensibility that they apply to romance. Dandies like to play
with their image, creating a striking and androgynous allure. Naturals are
spontaneous and open. Coquettes are self-sufficient, with a fascinating cool
at their core. Charmers want and know how to please—they are social crea-
tures. Charismatics have an unusual confidence in themselves. Stars are ethe-
real and envelop themselves in mystery.
The chapters in this section will take you inside each of the nine types.
At least one of the chapters should strike a chord—you will recognize part
of yourself. That chapter will be the key to developing your own powers of
attraction. Let us say you have coquettish tendencies. The Coquette chap-
ter will show you how to build upon your own self-sufficiency, alternating
heat and coldness to ensnare your victims. It will show you how to take
your natural qualities further, becoming a grand Coquette, the type we
fight over. There is no point in being timid with a seductive quality. We are
charmed by an unabashed Rake and excuse his excesses, but a halfhearted
Rake gets no respect. Once you have cultivated your dominant character
trait, adding some art to what nature has given you, you can then develop a
second or third trait, adding depth and mystery to your persona. Finally the
section's tenth chapter, on the Anti-Seducer, will make you aware of the op-
3

[PAGE 32]
4 • The Art of Seduction
posite potential within you—the power of repulsion. At all cost you must
root out any anti-seductive tendencies you may have.
Think of the nine types as shadows, silhouettes. Only by stepping into
one of them and letting it grow inside you can you begin to develop the
seductive character that will bring you limitless power.

[PAGE 33]
A
man is often
secretly oppressed by
the role he has to
play—by always having to
be responsible, in control, and
rational. The Siren is the ulti-
mate male fantasy figure because
she offers a total release from the
limitations of his life. In her pres-
ence, which is always heightened and
sexually charged, the male feels
transported to a world of pure plea-
sure. She is dangerous, and in pursu-
ing her energetically the man can lose
control over himself something he
yearns to do. The Siren is a mirage;
she lures men by cultivating a par-
ticular appearance and manner.
In a world where women are
often too timid to project such
an image, learn to take
control of the male li-
bido by embodying
his fantasy.

[PAGE 34]


[PAGE 35]
The Spectacular Siren
In the year 48 B.C., Ptolemy XIV of Egypt managed to depose and exile
his sister and wife, Queen Cleopatra. He secured the country's borders
against her return and began to rule on his own. Later that year, Julius Cae-
sar came to Alexandria to ensure that despite the local power struggles,
Egypt would remain loyal to Rome.
One night Caesar was meeting with his generals in the Egyptian palace,
In the mean time our good
discussing strategy, when a guard entered to report that a Greek merchant ship, with that perfect wind
was at the door bearing a large and valuable gift for the Roman leader. to drive her, fast
approached the Sirens' Isle.
Caesar, in the mood for a little fun, gave the merchant permission to enter.
But now the breeze
The man came in, carrying on his shoulders a large rolled-up carpet. He dropped, some power lulled
undid the rope around the bundle and with a snap of his wrists unfurled the waves, and a breathless
calm set in. Rising from
it—revealing the young Cleopatra, who had been hidden inside, and who
their seats my men drew
rose up half clothed before Caesar and his guests, like Venus emerging from in the sail and threw it into
the waves. the hold, then sat down
at the oars and churned the
Everyone was dazzled at the sight of the beautiful young queen (only
water white with their
twenty-one at the time) appearing before them suddenly as if in a dream.
blades of polished pine.
They were astounded at her daring and theatricality—smuggled into the Meanwhile I took a large
harbor at night with only one man to protect her, risking everything on a round of wax, cut it up
small with my sword, and
bold move. No one was more enchanted than Caesar. According to the
kneaded the pieces with all
Roman writer Dio Cassius, "Cleopatra was in the prime of life. She had a the strength of my fingers.
delightful voice which could not fail to cast a spell over all who heard it. The wax soon yielded to
my vigorous treatment and
Such was the charm of her person and her speech that they drew the cold-
grew warm, for I had the
est and most determined misogynist into her toils. Caesar was spellbound as rays of my Lord the Sun to
soon as he set eyes on her and she opened her mouth to speak." That same help me. I took each of my
men in turn and plugged
evening Cleopatra became Caesar s lover.
their ears with it. They
Caesar had had numerous mistresses before, to divert him from the rig- then made me a prisoner
ors of his campaigns. But he had always disposed of them quickly to return on my ship by binding me
hand and foot, standing
to what really thrilled him—political intrigue, the challenges of warfare,
me up by the step of the
the Roman theater. Caesar had seen women try anything to keep him un-
mast and tying the rope's
der their spell. Yet nothing prepared him for Cleopatra. One night she ends to the mast itself.
would tell him how together they could revive the glory of Alexander the This done, they sat down
once more and struck the
Great, and rule the world like gods. The next she would entertain him
grey water with their oars.
dressed as the goddess Isis, surrounded by the opulence of her court. • We made good progress
Cleopatra initiated Caesar in the most decadent revelries, presenting herself and had just come within
call of the shore when the
as the incarnation of the Egyptian exotic. His life with her was a constant
Sirens became aware that a
game, as challenging as warfare, for the moment he felt secure with her she ship was swiftly bearing
7

[PAGE 36]
8 • The Art of Seduction
down upon them, and would suddenly turn cold or angry and he would have to find a way to re-
broke into their liquid song. gain her favor.
• "Draw near," they sang,
The weeks went by. Caesar got rid of all Cleopatra's rivals and found
"illustrious Odysseus,
flower of Achaean chivalry, excuses to stay in Egypt. At one point she led him on a lavish historical ex-
and bring your ship to rest pedition down the Nile. In a boat of unimaginable splendor—towering
so that you may hear our fifty-four feet out of the water, including several terraced levels and a pil-
voices. No seaman ever
lared temple to the god Dionysus—Caesar became one of the few Romans
sailed his black ship past
this spot without listening to gaze on the pyramids. And while he stayed long in Egypt, away from
to the sweet tones that flow his throne in Rome, all kinds of turmoil erupted throughout the Roman
from our lips . . ." • The
Empire.
lovely voices came to me
across the water, and my When Caesar was murdered, in 44 B.C., he was succeeded by a triumvi-
heart was filled with such a rate of rulers including Mark Antony, a brave soldier who loved pleasure
longing to listen that with
and spectacle and fancied himself a kind of Roman Dionysus. A few years
nod and frown I signed to
my men to set me free. later, while Antony was in Syria, Cleopatra invited him to come meet her
in the Egyptian town of Tarsus. There—once she had made him wait for
—HOMER, THE ODYSSEY, BOOK
XII, TRANSLATED BY E.V. RIEU her—her appearance was as startling in its way as her first before Caesar. A
magnificent gold barge with purple sails appeared on the river Cydnus. The
oarsmen rowed to the accompaniment of ethereal music; all around the
The charm of [Cleopatra's]
boat were beautiful young girls dressed as nymphs and mythological figures.
presence was irresistible,
and there was an attraction Cleopatra sat on deck, surrounded and fanned by cupids and posed as the
in her person and talk, goddess Aphrodite, whose name the crowd chanted enthusiastically.
together with a peculiar
Like all of Cleopatra's victims, Antony felt mixed emotions. The exotic
force of character, which
pleasures she offered were hard to resist. But he also wanted to tame her—to
pervaded her every word
and action, and laid all defeat this proud and illustrious woman would prove his greatness. And so
who associated with her he stayed, and, like Caesar, fell slowly under her spell. She indulged him in
under its spell. It was a
all of his weaknesses—gambling, raucous parties, elaborate rituals, lavish
delight merely to hear the
sound of her voice, with spectacles. To get him to come back to Rome, Octavius, another member of
which, like an instrument the Roman triumvirate, offered him a wife: Octavius's own sister, Octavia,
of many strings, she could
one of the most beautiful women in Rome. Known for her virtue and
pass from one language to
another. goodness, she could surely keep Antony away from the "Egyptian whore."
The ploy worked for a while, but Antony was unable to forget Cleopatra,
—PLUTARCH, MAKERS OF
ROME, TRANSLATED BY IAN and after three years he went back to her. This time it was for good: he had
SCOTT-KILVERT in essence become Cleopatra's slave, granting her immense powers, adopting
Egyptian dress and customs, and renouncing the ways of Rome.
The immediate attraction
of a song, a voice, or scent. Only one image of Cleopatra survives—a barely visible profile on a coin—
The attraction of the but we have numerous written descriptions. She had a long thin face and a
panther with his perfumed
somewhat pointed nose; her dominant features were her wonderfully large
scent . . . According to the
eyes. Her seductive power, however, did not lie in her looks—indeed many
ancients, the panther is
the only animal who emits among the women of Alexandria were considered more beautiful than she.
a perfumed odor. It uses What she did have above all other women was the ability to distract a man.
this scent to draw and
In reality, Cleopatra was physically unexceptional and had no political
capture its victims. . . .
But what is it that seduces power, yet both Caesar and Antony, brave and clever men, saw none of
in a scent? . . . What is it this. What they saw was a woman who constantly transformed herself be-
in the song of the Sirens
fore their eyes, a one-woman spectacle. Her dress and makeup changed
that seduces us, or in the
beauty of a face, in the depths from day to day, but always gave her a heightened, goddesslike appearance.

[PAGE 37]
The Siren • 9
Her voice, which all writers talk of, was lilting and intoxicating. Her words of an abyss . . . ?
could be banal enough, but were spoken so sweetly that listeners would Seduction lies in the
annulment of signs and
find themselves remembering not what she said but how she said it.
their meaning, in pure
Cleopatra provided constant variety—tributes, mock battles, expedi-
appearance. The eyes that
tions, costumed orgies. Everything had a touch of drama and was accom- seduce have no meaning,
plished with great energy. By the time your head lay on the pillow beside they end in the gaze, as
the face with makeup
her, your mind was spinning with images and dreams. And just when you
ends in only pure
thought you had this fluid, larger-than-life woman, she would turn distant appearance. . . . The scent
or angry, making it clear that everything was on her terms. You never pos- of the panther is also a
meaningless message—and
sessed Cleopatra, you worshiped her. In this way a woman who had been
behind the message the
exiled and destined for an early death managed to turn it all around and panther is invisible, as is
rule Egypt for close to twenty years. the woman beneath her
makeup. The Sirens too
From Cleopatra we learn that it is not beauty that makes a Siren but
remained unseen. The
rather a theatrical streak that allows a woman to embody a man's fantasies. enchantment lies in what
A man grows bored with a woman, no matter how beautiful; he yearns for is hidden.
different pleasures, and for adventure. All a woman needs to turn this —JEAN BAUDRILLARD, DE LA
around is to create the illusion that she offers such variety and adventure. A SÉDUCTION
man is easily deceived by appearances; he has a weakness for the visual.
Create the physical presence of a Siren (heightened sexual allure mixed
with a regal and theatrical manner) and he is trapped. He cannot grow
bored with you yet he cannot discard you. Keep up the distractions, and We're dazzled by feminine
adornment, by the surface,
never let him see who you really are. He will follow you until he drowns.
\ All gold and jewels: so
little of what we observe \
Is the girl herself And
The Sex Siren where (you may ask) amid
such plenty \ Can our
object of passion be found?
Norma Jean Mortensen, the future Marilyn Monroe, spent part of her The eye's deceived \ By
childhood in Los Angeles orphanages. Her days were filled with Love's smart camouflage.
chores and no play. At school, she kept to herself, smiled rarely, and —OVID, CURES FOR LOVE,
dreamed a lot. One day when she was thirteen, as she was dressing for TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
school, she noticed that the white blouse the orphanage provided for her
was torn, so she had to borrow a sweater from a younger girl in the house.
The sweater was several sizes too small. That day, suddenly, boys seemed to He was herding his cattle
gather around her wherever she went (she was extremely well-developed on Mount Gargarus, the
highest peak of Ida, when
for her age). She wrote in her diary, "They stared at my sweater as if it were
Hermes, accompanied by
a gold mine." Hera, Athene, and
The revelation was simple but startling. Previously ignored and even Aphrodite delivered the
golden apple and Zeus's
ridiculed by the other students, Norma Jean now sensed a way to gain at-
message: "Paris, since you
tention, maybe even power, for she was wildly ambitious. She started to are as handsome as you are
smile more, wear makeup, dress differently. And soon she noticed some- wise in affairs of the heart,
Zeus commands you to
thing equally startling: without her having to say or do anything, boys fell
judge which of these
passionately in love with her. "My admirers all said the same thing in differ-
goddesses is the fairest. " •
ent ways," she wrote. "It was my fault, their wanting to kiss me and hug "So be it," sighed Paris.
me. Some said it was the way I looked at them—with eyes full of passion. "But first I beg the losers
not to be vexed with me. I
Others said it was my voice that lured them on. Still others said I gave off
am only a human being,
vibrations that floored them." liable to make the stupidest

[PAGE 38]
10 • The Art of Seduction
mistakes." • The A few years later Marilyn was trying to make it in the film business.
goddesses all agreed to Producers would tell her the same thing: she was attractive enough in per-
abide by his decision. •
son, but her face wasn't pretty enough for the movies. She was getting
"Will it be enough to
work as an extra, and when she was on-screen—even if only for a few sec-
judge them as they are?"
Paris asked Hermes, "or onds—the men in the audience would go wild, and the theaters would
should they he naked?" • erupt in catcalls. But nobody saw any star quality in this. One day in 1949,
"The rules of the contest
only twenty-three at the time and her career at a standstill, Monroe met
are for you to decide,"
Hermes answered with a someone at a diner who told her that a producer casting a new Groucho
discreet smile. • "In that Marx movie, Love Happy, was looking for an actress for the part of a blond
case, will they kindly
bombshell who could walk by Groucho in a way that would, in his words,
disrobe?" • Hermes told
the goddesses to do so, and "arouse my elderly libido and cause smoke to issue from my ears." Talking
politely turned his back. • her way into an audition, she improvised this walk. "It's Mae West, Theda
Aphrodite was soon ready,
Bara, and Bo Peep all rolled into one," said Groucho after watching her
but Athene insisted that
saunter by. "We shoot the scene tomorrow morning." And so Marilyn cre-
she should remove the
famous magic girdle, which ated her infamous walk, a walk that was hardly natural but offered a strange
gave her an unfair mix of innocence and sex.
advantage by making
Over the next few years, Marilyn taught herself through trial and er-
everyone fall in love
withthe wearer. "Very ror how to heighten the effect she had on men. Her voice had always been
well" said Aphrodite attractive—it was the voice of a little girl. But on film it had limitations un-
spitefully. "I will, on
til someone finally taught her to lower it, giving it the deep, breathy tones
condition that you remove
your helmet—you look that became her seductive trademark, a mix of the little girl and the vixen.
hideous without it. " • Before appearing on set, or even at a party, Marilyn would spend hours be-
"Now, if you please, 1
fore the mirror. Most people assumed this was vanity—she was in love with
must judge you one at
a time" announced her image. The truth was that image took hours to create. Marilyn spent
Paris. . . . Come here, years studying and practicing the art of makeup. The voice, the walk, the
Divine Hera! Will you
face and look were all constructions, an act. At the height of her fame, she
other two goddesses be good
would get a thrill by going into bars in New York City without her makeup
enough to leave us for a
while?" • "Examine me or glamorous clothes and passing unnoticed.
conscientiously," said Hera, Success finally came, but with it came something deeply annoying to
turning slowly around, and
her: the studios would only cast her as the blond bombshell. She wanted se-
displaying her magnificent
figure, "and remember that rious roles, but no one took her seriously for those parts, no matter how
if you judge me the fairest, hard she downplayed the siren qualities she had built up. One day, while she
1 will make you lord of all
was rehearsing a scene from The Cherry Orchard, her acting instructor, Mi-
Asia, and the richest man
alive. " • "I am not to be chael Chekhov, asked her, "Were you thinking of sex while we played the
bribed my Lady . . . Very scene?" When she said no, he continued, "All through our playing of the
well, thank you. Now I
scene I kept receiving sex vibrations from you. As if you were a woman in
have seen all that I need to
see. Come, Divine the grip of passion. ... I understand your problem with your studio now,
Athene!" • "Here I am," Marilyn. You are a woman who gives off sex vibrations—no matter what
said Athene, striding
you are doing or thinking. The whole world has already responded to those
purposefully forward.
vibrations. They come off the movie screens when you are on them."
"Listen, Paris, if you have
enough common sense to
award me the prize, I will Marilyn Monroe loved the effect her body could have on the male libido.
make you victorious in
She tuned her physical presence like an instrument, making herself reek of
all your battles, as well
as the handsomest and sex and gaining a glamorous, larger-than-life appearance. Other women
wisest man in the world." knew just as many tricks for heightening their sexual appeal, but what sepa-
• "I am a humble
rated Marilyn from them was an unconscious element. Her background

[PAGE 39]
The Siren • 11
had deprived her of something critical: affection. Her deepest need was to herdsman, not a soldier,"
feel loved and desired, which made her seem constantly vulnerable, like a said Paris. . . . "But I
promise to consider fairly
little girl craving protection. She emanated this need for love before the
your claim to the apple.
camera; it was effortless, coming from somewhere real and deep inside. A
Now you are at liberty to
look or gesture that she did not intend to arouse desire would do so doubly put on your clothes and
powerfully just because it was unintended—its innocence was precisely helmet again. Is Aphrodite
ready?" • Aphrodite sidled
what excited a man.
up to him, and Paris
The Sex Siren has a more urgent and immediate effect than the Spec- blushed because she came
tacular Siren does. The incarnation of sex and desire, she does not bother so close that they were
almost touching. • "Look
to appeal to extraneous senses, or to create a theatrical buildup. Her time
carefully, please, pass
never seems to be taken up by work or chores; she gives the impression that nothing over. . . . By the
she lives for pleasure and is always available. What separates the Sex Siren way, as soon as I saw you,
I said to myself: 'Upon my
from the courtesan or whore is her touch of innocence and vulnerability.
word, there goes the
The mix is perversely satisfying: it gives the male the critical illusion that he handsomest young man in
is a protector, the father figure, although it is actually the Sex Siren who Phrygia! Why does he
waste himself here in the
controls the dynamic.
wilderness herding stupid
A woman doesn't have to be born with the attributes of a Marilyn
cattle?' Well, why do you,
Monroe to fill the role of the Sex Siren. Most of the physical elements are Paris? Why not move into
a construction; the key is the air of schoolgirl innocence. While one part of a city and lead a civilized
life? What have you to lose
you seems to scream sex, the other part is coy and naive, as if you were in-
by marrying someone like
capable of understanding the effect you are having. Your walk, your voice, Helen of Sparta, who is as
your manner are delightfully ambiguous—you are both the experienced, beautiful as I am, and no
less passionate? . . . I
desiring woman and the innocent gamine.
suggest now that you tour
Greece with my son Eros
Your next encounter will be with the Sirens, who bewitch as your guide. Once you
every man that approaches them. . . . For with the music reach Sparta, he and I will
see that Helen falls head
of their song the Sirens cast their spell upon him, as they
over heels in love with
sit there in a meadow piled high with the moldering skele- you." • "Would you swear
tons of men, whose withered skin still hangs upon their to that?" Paris ashed
bones. excitedly. • Aphrodite
uttered a solemn oath, and
—CIRCE TO ODYSSEUS, THE ODYSSEY, BOOK XII Paris, without a second
thought, awarded her the
golden apple.
Keys to the Character —ROBERT GRAVES, THE GREEK
MYTHS, VOLUME I
The Siren is the most ancient seductress of them all. Her prototype is
the goddess Aphrodite—it is her nature to have a mythic quality about
her—but do not imagine she is a thing of the past, or of legend and his-
tory: she represents a powerful male fantasy of a highly sexual, supremely
confident, alluring female offering endless pleasure and a bit of danger. In
today's world this fantasy can only appeal the more strongly to the male
psyche, for now more than ever he lives in a world that circumscribes his
aggressive instincts by making everything safe and secure, a world that offers
less chance for adventure and risk than ever before. In the past, a man had
some outlets for these drives—warfare, the high seas, political intrigue. In
the sexual realm, courtesans and mistresses were practically a social institu-

[PAGE 40]
12 • The Art of Seduction
To whom aw I compare tion, and offered him the variety and the chase that he craved. Without any
the lovely girl, so blessed by outlets, his drives turn inward and gnaw at him, becoming all the more
fortune, if not to the
volatile for being repressed. Sometimes a powerful man will do the most ir-
Sirens, who with their
rational things, have an affair when it is least called for, just for a thrill, the
lodestone draw the ships
towards them? Thus, I danger of it all. The irrational can prove immensely seductive, even more
imagine, did Isolde attract so for men, who must always seem so reasonable.
many thoughts and hearts
If it is seductive power you are after, the Siren is the most potent of all.
that deemed themselves
safe from love's She operates on a man's most basic emotions, and if she plays her role prop-
disquietude. And indeed erly, she can transform a normally strong and responsible male into a child-
these two—anchorless
ish slave. The Siren operates well on the rigid masculine type—the soldier
ships and stray thoughts—
provide a good comparison. or hero—just as Cleopatra overwhelmed Mark Antony and Marilyn Mon-
They are both so seldom roe Joe DiMaggio. But never imagine that these are the only types the
on a straight course, lie so
Siren can affect. Julius Caesar was a writer and thinker, who had transferred
often in unsure havens,
pitching and tossing and his intellectual abilities onto the battlefield and into the political arena; the
heaving to and fro. Just so, playwright Arthur Miller fell as deeply under Monroe's spell as DiMaggio.
in the same way, do
The intellectual is often the one most susceptible to the Siren call of pure
aimless desire and random
physical pleasure, because his life so lacks it. The Siren does not have to
love-longing drift like an
anchorless ship. This worry about finding the right victim. Her magic works on one and all.
charming young princess, First and foremost, a Siren must distinguish herself from other women.
discreet and courteous
She is by nature a rare thing, mythic, only one to a group; she is also a valu-
Isolde, drew thoughts from
the hearts that enshrined able prize to be wrested away from other men. Cleopatra made herself dif-
them as a lodestone draws ferent through her sense of high drama; the Empress Josephine Bonaparte's
in ships to the sound of the
device was her extreme languorousness; Marilyn Monroe's was her little-
Sirens' song. She sang
openly and secretly, in girl quality. Physicality offers the best opportunities here, since a Siren is
through ears and eyes to preeminently a sight to behold. A highly feminine and sexual presence,
where many a heart was
even to the point of caricature, will quickly differentiate you, since most
stirred. The song which she
sang openly in this and women lack the confidence to project such an image.
other places was her own Once the Siren has made herself stand out from others, she must have
sweet singing and soft
two other critical qualities: the ability to get the male to pursue her so
sounding of strings that
feverishly that he loses control; and a touch of the dangerous. Danger is
echoed for all to hear
through the kingdom of the surprisingly seductive. To get the male to pursue you is relatively simple: a
ears deep down into the highly sexual presence will do this quite well. But you must not resemble a
heart. But her secret song
courtesan or whore, whom the male may pursue only to quickly lose inter-
was her wondrous beauty
that stole with its rapturous est in her. Instead, you are slightly elusive and distant, a fantasy come to life.
music hidden and unseen During the Renaissance, the great Sirens, such as Tullia d'Aragona, would
through the windows of the
act and look like Grecian goddesses—the fantasy of the day. Today you
eyes into many noble
hearts and smoothed on the might model yourself on a film goddess—anything that seems larger than
magic which took thoughts life, even awe inspiring. These qualities will make a man chase you vehe-
prisoner suddenly, and,
mently, and the more he chases, the more he will feel that he is acting on
taking them, fettered them
his own initiative. This is an excellent way of disguising how deeply you
with desire!
are manipulating him.
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY The notion of danger, challenge, sometimes death, might seem out-
A.T. HATTO dated, but danger is critical in seduction. It adds emotional spice and is
particularly appealing to men today, who are normally so rational and re-
pressed. Danger is present in the original myth of the Siren. In Homer's
Odyssey, the hero Odysseus must sail by the rocks where the Sirens, strange

[PAGE 41]
The Siren • 13
female creatures, sing and beckon sailors to their destruction. They sing of Falling in love with statues
the glories of the past, of a world like childhood, without responsibilities, a and paintings, even
making love to them is an
world of pure pleasure. Their voices are like water, liquid and inviting.
ancient fantasy, one of
Sailors would leap into the water to join them, and drown; or, distracted
which the Renaissance was
and entranced, they would steer their ship into the rocks. To protect his keenly aware. Giorgio
sailors from the Sirens, Odysseus has their ears filled with wax; he himself is Vasari, writing in the
introductory section of the
tied to the mast, so he can both hear the Sirens and live to tell of it—a
Lives about art in
strange desire, since the thrill of the Sirens is giving in to the temptation to antiquity, tells how men
follow them. violated the laws, going
into the temples at night
Just as the ancient sailors had to row and steer, ignoring all distractions,
and making love with
a man today must work and follow a straight path in life. The call of some- statues of Venus. In the
thing dangerous, emotional, unknown is all the more powerful because it is morning, priests would
enter the sanctuaries to find
so forbidden. Think of the victims of the great Sirens of history: Paris
stains on the marble
causes a war for the sake of Helen of Troy, Caesar risks an empire and figures.
Antony loses his power and his life for Cleopatra, Napoleon becomes a
—LYNNE LAWNER,
laughingstock over Josephine, DiMaggio never gets over Marilyn, and LIVES OF THE COURTESANS
Arthur Miller can't write for years. A man is often ruined by a Siren, yet
cannot tear himself away. (Many powerful men have a masochistic streak.)
An element of danger is easy to hint at, and will enhance your other Siren
characteristics—the touch of madness in Marilyn, for example, that pulled
men in. Sirens are often fantastically irrational, which is immensely attrac-
tive to men who are oppressed by their own reasonableness. An element of
fear is also critical: keeping a man at a proper distance creates respect, so
that he doesn't get close enough to see through you or notice your weaker
qualities. Create such fear by suddenly changing your moods, keeping the
man off balance, occasionally intimidating him with capricious behavior.
The most important element for an aspiring Siren is always the physical,
the Siren's main instrument of power. Physical qualities—a scent, a height-
ened femininity evoked through makeup or through elaborate or seductive
clothing—act all the more powerfully on men because they have no mean-
ing. In their immediacy they bypass rational processes, having the same ef-
fect that a decoy has on an animal, or the movement of a cape on a bull.
The proper Siren appearance is often confused with physical beauty, par-
ticularly the face. But a beautiful face does not a Siren make: instead it cre-
ates too much distance and coldness. (Neither Cleopatra nor Marilyn
Monroe, the two greatest Sirens in history, were known for their beautiful
faces.) Although a smile and an inviting look are infinitely seductive, they
must never dominate your appearance. They are too obvious and direct.
The Siren must stimulate a generalized desire, and the best way to do this is
by creating an overall impression that is both distracting and alluring. It is
not one particular trait, but a combination of qualities:
The voice. Clearly a critical quality, as the legend indicates, the Siren's
voice has an immediate animal presence with incredible suggestive power.
Perhaps that power is regressive, recalling the ability of the mother's voice

[PAGE 42]
14 • The Art of Seduction
to calm or excite her child even before the child understood what she was
saying. The Siren must have an insinuating voice that hints at the erotic,
more often subliminally than overtly. Almost everyone who met Cleopatra
commented on her delightful, sweet-sounding voice, which had a mesmer-
izing quality. The Empress Josephine, one of the great seductresses of the
late eighteenth century, had a languorous voice that men found exotic, and
suggestive of her Creole origins. Marilyn Monroe was born with her
breathy, childlike voice, but she learned to lower to make it truly seductive.
Lauren Bacall's voice is naturally low; its seductive power comes from its
slow, suggestive delivery. The Siren never speaks quickly, aggressively, or at
a high pitch. Her voice is calm and unhurried, as if she had never quite
woken up—or left her bed.
Body and adornment. If the voice must lull, the body and its adornment
must dazzle. It is with her clothes that the Siren aims to create the god-
dess effect that Baudelaire described in his essay "In Praise of Makeup":
"Woman is well within her rights, and indeed she is accomplishing a kind
of duty in striving to appear magical and supernatural. She must astonish
and bewitch; an idol, she must adorn herself with gold in order to be
adored. She must borrow from all of the arts in order to raise herself above
nature, the better to subjugate hearts and stir souls."
A Siren who was a genius of clothes and adornment was Pauline Bona-
parte, sister of Napoleon. Pauline consciously strove for a goddess effect,
fashioning hair, makeup, and clothes to evoke the look and air of Venus,
the goddess of love. No one in history could boast a more extensive and
elaborate wardrobe. Pauline's entrance at a ball in 1798 created an astound-
ing effect. She asked the hostess, Madame Permon, if she could dress at her
house, so no one would see her clothes as she came in. When she came
down the stairs, everyone stopped dead in stunned silence. She wore the
headdress of a bacchante—clusters of gold grapes interlaced in her hair,
which was done up in the Greek style. Her Greek tunic, with its gold-
embroidered hem, showed off her goddesslike figure. Below her breasts was
a girdle of burnished gold, held by a magnificent jewel. "No words can
convey the loveliness of her appearance," wrote the Duchess d'Abrantes.
"The very room grew brighter as she entered. The whole ensemble was so
harmonious that her appearance was greeted with a buzz of admiration
which continued with utter disregard of all the other women."
The key: everything must dazzle, but must also be harmonious, so that
no single ornament draws attention. Your presence must be charged, larger
than life, a fantasy come true. Ornament is used to cast a spell and distract.
The Siren can also use clothing to hint at the sexual, at times overtly but
more often by suggesting it rather than screaming it—that would make you
seem manipulative. Related to this is the notion of selective disclosure, the
revealing of only a part of the body—but a part that will excite and stir the
imagination. In the late sixteenth century, Marguerite de Valois, the infa-

[PAGE 43]
The Siren • 15
mous daughter of Queen Catherine de Médicis of France, was one of the
first women ever to incorporate decolletage in her wardrobe, simply be-
cause she had the most beautiful breasts in the realm. For Josephine Bona-
parte it was her arms, which she carefully always left bare.
Movement and demeanor. In the fifth century B.C., King Kou Chien
chose the Chinese Siren Hsi Shih from among all the women of his realm
to seduce and destroy his rival Fu Chai, King of Wu; for this purpose, he
had the young woman instructed in the arts of seduction. Most important
of these was movement—how to move gracefully and suggestively. Hsi
Shih learned to give the impression of floating across the floor in her court
robes. When she was finally unleashed on Fu Chai, he quickly fell under
her spell. She walked and moved like no one he had ever seen. He became
obsessed with her tremulous presence, her manner and nonchalant air. Fu
Chai fell so deeply in love that he let his kingdom fall to pieces, allowing
Kou Chien to march in and conquer it without a fight.
The Siren moves gracefully and unhurriedly. The proper gestures,
movement, and demeanor for a Siren are like the proper voice: they hint at
something exciting, stirring desire without being obvious. Your air must be
languorous, as if you had all the time in the world for love and pleasure.
Your gestures must have a certain ambiguity, suggesting something both
innocent and erotic. Anything that cannot immediately be understood is
supremely seductive, and all the more so if it permeates your manner.
Symbol: Water.
The song of the Siren is liquid and
enticing, and the Siren herself is fluid and un-
graspable. Like the sea, the Siren lures you with the
promise of infinite adventure and pleasure. Forgetting past
and future, men follow her far out to sea, where they drown.

[PAGE 44]
16 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
No matter how enlightened the age, no woman can maintain the image
of being devoted to pleasure completely comfortably. And no matter
how hard she tries to distance herself from it, the taint of being easy always
follows the Siren. Cleopatra was hated in Rome as the Egyptian whore.
That hatred eventually lead to her downfall, as Octavius and the Roman
army sought to extirpate the stain on Roman manhood that she came to
represent. Even so, men are often forgiving when it comes to the Siren's
reputation. But danger often lies in the envy she stirs up among other
women; much of Rome's hatred for Cleopatra originated in the resentment
she provoked among the city's stern matrons. By playing up her innocence,
by making herself seem the victim of male desire, the Siren can somewhat
blunt the effects of feminine envy. But on the whole there is little she can
do—her power comes from her effect on men, and she must learn to ac-
cept, or ignore, the envy of other women.
Finally, the intense attention that the Siren attracts can prove irritating
and worse. Sometimes she will pine for relief from it; sometimes, too, she
will want to attract an attention that is not sexual. Also, unfortunately,
physical beauty fades; although the Siren effect depends not on a beautiful
face but on an overall impression, past a certain age that impression gets
hard to project. Both of these factors contributed to the suicide of Marilyn
Monroe. It takes a genius on the level of Madame de Pompadour, the Siren
mistress of King Louis XV, to make the transition into the role of the spir-
ited older woman who continues to seduce with her nonphysical charms.
Cleopatra had such an intellect, and had she lived long enough, she would
have remained a potent seductress for many years. The Siren must prepare
for age by paying attention early on to the more psychological, less physical
forms of coquetry that can continue to bring her power once her beauty
starts to fade.

[PAGE 45]
A woman
never quite feels desired and appreciated
enough. She wants attention, but a man is too often
distracted and unresponsive. The Rake is a great female fantasy
figure—when he desires a woman, brief though that moment may be,
he will go to the ends of the earth for her. He may be disloyal, dishonest,
and amoral, but that only adds to his appeal. Unlike the normal, cautious
male, the Rake is delightfully unrestrained, a slave to his love of women.
There is the added lure of his reputation: so many women have suc-
cumbed to him, there has to be a reason. Words are a woman's weak-
ness, and the Rake is a master of seductive language. Stir a
woman's repressed longings by adapting the Rake's
mix of danger and pleasure.

[PAGE 46]


[PAGE 47]
The Ardent Rake
For the court of Louis XIV, the king's last years were gloomy—he was
old, and had become both insufferably religious and personally unpleas-
ant. The court was bored and desperate for novelty. So in 1710, the arrival
of a fifteen-year-old lad who was both devilishly handsome and charming
had a particularly strong effect on the ladies. His name was Fronsac, the
future Duke de Richelieu (his granduncle being the infamous Cardinal [After an accident at sect,
Richelieu). He was impudent and witty. The ladies would play with him Don Juan finds himself
washed up on a beach,
like a toy, but he would kiss them on the lips in return, his hands wandering
where he is discovered by a
far for an inexperienced boy. When those hands strayed up the skirts of a young woman.] • TISBEA:
duchess who was not so indulgent, the king was furious, and sent the youth Wake up, handsomest of
all men, and be yourself
to the Bastille to teach him a lesson. But the ladies who had found him so
again. • DON JUAN: If the
amusing could not endure his absence. Compared to the stiffs in court, here
sea gives me death, you
was someone incredibly bold, his eyes boring into you, his hands quicker give me life. But the sea
than was safe. Nothing could stop him, his novelty was irresistible. The really saved me only to be
killed by you. Oh the sea
court ladies pleaded and his stay in the Bastille was cut short.
tosses me from one torment
Several years later, the young Mademoiselle de Valois was walking in a to the other, for I no sooner
Paris park with her chaperone, an older woman who never left her side. De pulled myself from the
water than I met this
Valois's father, the Duke d'Orléans, was determined to protect her, his
siren—yourself. Why fill
youngest daughter, from all the court seducers until she could be married my ears with wax, since
off, so he had attached to her this chaperone, a woman of impeccable you kill me with your
eyes? I was dying in the
virtue and sourness. In the park, however, de Valois saw a young man who
sea, but from today I shall
gave her a look that set her heart on fire. He walked on by, but the look was die of love. • TISBEA: YOU
intense and clear. It was her chaperone who told her his name: the now in- have abundant breath for a
man almost drowned. You
famous Duke de Richelieu, blasphemer, seducer, heartbreaker. Someone to
suffered much, but who
avoid at all cost.
knows what suffering you
A few days later, the chaperone took de Valois to a different park, and are preparing for me? . . .
lo and behold, Richelieu crossed their path again. This time he was in dis- I found you at my feet all
water, and now you are all
guise, dressed as a beggar, but the look in his eye was unforgettable. Made-
fire. If you burn when you
moiselle de Valois returned his gaze: at last something exciting in her drab are so wet, what will you
life. Given her father's sternness, no man had dared approach her. And now do when you're dry again?
You promise a scorching
this notorious courtier was pursuing her, instead of all the other ladies at
flame; I hope to God
court—what a thrill! Soon he was smuggling beautifully written notes to you're not lying. • DON
her expressing his uncontrollable desire for her. She responded timidly, but JUAN: Dear girl, God
should have drowned me
soon the notes were all she was living for. In one of them he promised to
before I could be charred by
arrange everything if she would spend the night with him; imagining it was you. Perhaps love was wise
19

[PAGE 48]
20 • The Art of Seduction
to drench me before I felt impossible to bring such a thing to pass, she did not mind playing along and
your scalding touch. But agreeing to his bold proposal.
your fire is such that even
Mademoiselle de Valois had a chambermaid named Angelique, who
in water I burn. • TISBEA:
So cold and yet burning? • dressed her for bed and slept in an adjoining room. One night as the chap-
DON JUAN: So much fire erone was knitting, de Valois looked up from the book she was reading to
is in you. • TISBEA: How see Angelique carrying her mistress's nightclothes to her room, but for some
well you talk! • DON
JUAN: How well you strange reason Angelique looked back at her and smiled—it was Richelieu,
understand! • TISBEA: I expertly dressed as the maid! De Valois nearly gasped from fright, but caught
hope to God you're not herself, realizing the danger she was in: if she said anything her family
lying.
would find out about the notes, and about her part in the whole affair.
—TIRSO DE MOLINA, THE
What could she do? She decided to go to her room and talk the young
PLAYBOY OF SEVILLE,
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M. duke out of his ridiculously dangerous maneuver. She said good night to her
SCHIZZANO AND OSCAR chaperone, but once she was in her bedroom, the words she had planned
MANDEL
were useless. When she tried to reason with Richelieu, he responded with
that look in his eye, and then with his arms around her. She could not yell,
but now she was unsure what to do. His impetuous words, his caresses, the
Pleased with my first danger of it all—her head was whirling, she was lost. What was virtue and
success, I determined to
her prior boredom compared to an evening with the court's most notorious
profit by this happy
rake? So while the chaperone knitted away, the duke initiated her into the
reconciliation. I called them
my dear wives, my faithful rituals of libertinage.
companions, the two beings Months later, de Valois's father had reason to suspect that Richelieu had
chosen to make me happy.
broken through his lines of defense. The chaperone was fired, the precau-
I sought to turn their
heads, and to rouse in tions were doubled. D'Orléans did not realize that to Richelieu such mea-
them desires the strength of sures were a challenge, and he lived for challenges. He bought the house
which I knew and which
next door under an assumed name and secretly tunneled a trapdoor through
would drive away any
reflections contrary to my the wall adjoining the duke's kitchen cupboard. In this cupboard, over the
plans. The skillful man next few months—until the novelty wore off—de Valois and Richelieu en-
who knows how to
joyed endless trysts.
communicate gradually the
Everyone in Paris knew of Richelieu's exploits, for he made it a point
heat of love to the senses of
the most virtuous woman to publicize them as loudly as possible. Every week a new story would cir-
is quite certain of soon culate through the court. A husband had locked his wife in an upstairs
being absolute master of
room at night, worried the duke was after her; to reach her the duke had
her mind and her person;
you cannot reflect when crawled in darkness along a thin wooden plank suspended between two
you have lost your head; upper-floor windows. Two women who lived in the same house, one a
and, moreover, principles of
widow, the other married and quite religious, had discovered to their mu-
wisdom, however deeply
engraved they may be on tual horror that the duke was having an affair with both of them at the
the mind, are effaced in same time, leaving one in the middle of the night to be with the other.
that moment when the
When they confronted him, the duke, always on the prowl for something
heart yearns only for
novel, and a devilish talker, had neither apologized nor backed down, but
pleasure: pleasure alone
then commands and is proceeded to talk them into a menage a trois, playing on the wounded
obeyed. The man who has vanity of each woman, who could not stand the thought of him preferring
had experience of conquests
the other. Year after year, the stories of his remarkable seductions spread.
nearly always succeeds
where he who is only timid One woman admired his audacity and bravery, another his gallantry in
and in love fails. . . . • thwarting a husband. Women competed for his attention: if he did not
When I had brought my
want to seduce you, there had to be something wrong with you. To be the
two belles to the state of
abandonment in which I target of his attentions became a great fantasy. At one point two ladies

[PAGE 49]
The Rake • 21
fought a pistol duel over the duke, and one of them was seriously wanted them, I expressed a
wounded. The Duchess d'Orléans, Richelieu's most bitter enemy, once more eager desire; their
eyes lit up; my caresses
wrote, "If I believed in sorcery I should think that the Duke possessed
were returned; and it was
some supernatural secret, for I have never known a woman to oppose the plain that their resistance
very least resistance to him." would not delay for more
than a few moments the
next scene I desired them
In seduction there is often a dilemma: to seduce you need planning and cal-
to play. I proposed that
culation, but if your victim suspects that you have ulterior motives, she will each should accompany me
grow defensive. Furthermore, if you seem to be in control, you will inspire in turn into a charming
closet, next to the room in
fear instead of desire. The Ardent Rake solves this dilemma in the most art-
which we were, which I
ful manner. Of course he must calculate and plan—he has to find a way wanted them to admire.
around the jealous husband, or whatever the obstacle is. It is exhausting They both remained silent.
• "You hesitate?" I said to
work. But by nature, the Ardent Rake also has the advantage of an uncon-
them. "I will see which of
trollable libido. When he pursues a woman, he really is aglow with desire; you is the more attached
the victim senses this and is inflamed, even despite herself. How can she to me. The one who loves
me the more will be the
imagine that he is a heartless seducer who will abandon her when he so ar-
first to follow the lover she
dently braves all dangers and obstacles to get to her? And even if she is
wishes to convince of her
aware of his rakish past, of his incorrigible amorality, it doesn't matter, be- affection. . . ." • I knew
cause she also sees his weakness. He cannot control himself; he actually is a my puritan, and I was well
aware that, after a few
slave to all women. As such he inspires no fear.
Struggles, she gave herself
The Ardent Rake teaches us a simple lesson: intense desire has a dis- up completely to the
tracting power on a woman, just as the Siren's physical presence does on a present moment. 'This one
appeared to be as agreeable
man. A woman is often defensive and can sense insincerity or calculation.
to her as the others we had
But if she feels consumed by your attentions, and is confident you will do previously spent together;
anything for her, she will notice nothing else about you, or will find a way she forgot that she was
sharing me [with Madame
to forgive your indiscretions. This is the perfect cover for a seducer. The
Renaud]. ...• [When
key is to show no hesitation, to abandon all restraint, to let yourself go, to her turn came] Madame
show that you cannot control yourself and are fundamentally weak. Do not Renaud responded with a
transport that proved her
worry about inspiring mistrust; as long as you are the slave to her charms,
contentment, and she left
she will not think of the aftermath.
the sitting only after having
repeated continually:
"What a man! What a
The Demonic Rake man! He is astonishing!
How often you could be
happy with him if he were
In the early 1880s, members of Roman high society began to talk of a only faithful!"
young journalist who had arrived on the scene, a certain Gabriele D'An- —THE PRIVATE LIFE OF THE
nunzio. This was strange in itself, for Italian royalty had only the deepest MARSHAL DUKE OF RICHELIEU,
TRANSLATED BY F. S. FLINT
contempt for anyone outside their circle, and a newspaper society reporter
was almost as low as you could go. Indeed well-born men paid D'Annun-
zio little attention. He had no money and few connections, coming from a
strictly middle-class background. Besides, to them he was downright
ugly—short and stocky, with a dark, splotchy complexion and bulging eyes.
The men thought him so unappealing they gladly let him mingle with their
wives and daughters, certain that their women would be safe with this gar-
goyle and happy to get this gossip hunter off their hands. No, it was not the
men who talked of D'Annunzio; it was their wives.

[PAGE 50]
22 • The Art of Seduction
His very successes in love, Introduced to D'Annunzio by their husbands, these duchesses and mar-
even more than the chionesses would find themselves entertaining this strange-looking man,
marvellous voice of this
and when he was alone with them, his manner would suddenly change.
little, bald seducer with a
Within minutes these ladies would be spellbound. First, he had the most
nose like Punch, swept
along in his train a whole magnificent voice they had ever heard—soft and low, each syllable articu-
procession of enamoured lated, with a flowing rhythm and inflection that was almost musical. One
women, both opulent and
woman compared it to the ringing of church bells in the distance. Others
tormented. D'Annunzio
had successfully revived the said his voice had a "hypnotic" effect. The words that voice spoke were in-
Byronic legend: as he teresting as well—alliterative phrases, charming locutions, poetic images,
passed by full-breasted
and a way of offering praise that could melt a woman's heart. D'Annunzio
women, standing in his
way as Boldoni would had mastered the art of flattery. He seemed to know each woman's weak-
paint them, strings of ness: one he would call a goddess of nature, another an incomparable artist
pearls anchoring them to
in the making, another a romantic figure out of a novel. A woman's heart
life—princesses and
would flutter as he described the effect she had on him. Everything was
actresses, great Russian
ladies and even middle- suggestive, hinting at sex or romance. That night she would ponder his
class Bordeaux words, recalling little in particular that he had said, because he never said
housewives—they would
anything concrete, but rather the feeling it had given her. The next day she
offer themselves up to him.
would receive from him a poem that seemed to have been written spe-
—PHILIPPE JULLIAN, PRINCE OF
cifically for her. (In fact he wrote dozens of very similar poems, slightly
AESTHETES: COUNT ROBERT
DE MONTESQUIEOU, TRANSLATED tailoring each one for its intended victim.)
BY JOHN HAYLOCK AND FRANCIS
A few years after D'Annunzio began work as a society reporter, he mar-
KING
ried the daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Gallese. Shortly thereafter,
with the unshakeable support of society ladies, he began publishing novels
and books of poetry. The number of his conquests was remarkable, and
In short, nothing is so
sweet as to triumph over also the quality—not only marchionesses would fall at his feet, but great
the Resistance of a artists, such as the actress Eleanor Duse, who helped him become a re-
beautiful Person; and in
spected dramatist and literary celebrity. The dancer Isadora Duncan, an-
that I have the Ambition
of Conquerors, who fly other who eventually fell under his spell, explained his magic: "Perhaps the
perpetually from Victory to most remarkable lover of our time is Gabriele D'Annunzio. And this
Victory and can never
notwithstanding that he is small, bald, and, except when his face lights up
prevail with themselves to
with enthusiasm, ugly But when he speaks to a woman he likes, his face is
put a bound to their
Wishes. Nothing can transfigured, so that he suddenly becomes Apollo. . . . His effect on women
restrain the Impetuosity of is remarkable. The lady he is talking to suddenly feels that her very soul and
my Desires; I have an
being are lifted."
Heart for the whole Earth;
and like Alexander, I could At the outbreak of World War I, the fifty-two-year-old D'Annunzio
wish for New Worlds joined the army. Although he had no military experience, he had a flair for
wherein to extend my
the dramatic and a burning desire to prove his bravery. He learned to fly
Amorous Conquests.
and led dangerous but highly effective missions. By the end of the war, he
—MOLIÈRE, DON JOHN OR
was Italy's most decorated hero. His exploits made him a beloved national
THE LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY
JOHN OZELL figure, and after the war, crowds would gather outside his hotel wherever in
Italy he went. He would address them from a balcony, discussing politics,
railing against the current Italian government. A witness of one of these
speeches, the American writer Walter Starkie, was initially disappointed at
the appearance of the famous D'Annunzio on a balcony in Venice; he was
short, and looked grotesque. "Little by little, however, I began to sink under
the fascination of the voice, which penetrated into my consciousness. . . .

[PAGE 51]
The Rake • 23
Never a hurried, jerky gesture. . . . He played upon the emotions of the Among the many modes of
crowd as a supreme violinist does upon a Stradivarius. The eyes of the handling Don Juan's effect
on women, the motif of the
thousands were fixed upon him as though hypnotized by his power." Once
irresistible hero is worth
again, it was the sound of the voice and the poetic connotations of the singling out, for it
words that seduced the masses. Arguing that modern Italy should reclaim illustrates a curious change
the greatness of the Roman Empire, D'Annunzio would craft slogans for in our sensibility. Don
Juan did not become
the audience to repeat, or would ask emotionally loaded questions for them
irresistible to women until
to answer. He flattered the crowd, made them feel they were part of some the Romantic age, and I
drama. Everything was vague and suggestive. am disposed to think that
it is a trait of the female
The issue of the day was the ownership of the city of Fiume, just across
imagination to make him
the border in neighboring Yugoslavia. Many Italians believed that Italy's re- so. When the female voice
ward for siding with the Allies in the recent war should be the annexation began to assert itself and
even, perhaps, to dominate
of Fiume. D'Annunzio championed this cause, and because of his status as
in literature, Don Juan
a war hero the army was ready to side with him, although the government evolved to become the
opposed any action. In September of 1919, with soldiers rallying around women's rather than the
man's ideal. . . . Don
him, D'Annunzio led his infamous march on Fiume. When an Italian gen-
Juan is now the woman's
eral stopped him along the way, and threatened to shoot him, D'Annunzio
dream of the perfect lover,
opened his coat to show his medals, and said in his magnetic voice, "If you fugitive, passionate, daring.
must kill me, fire first on this!" The general stood there stunned, then He gives her the one
unforgettable moment, the
broke into tears. He joined up with D'Annunzio.
magnificent exaltation of
When D'Annunzio entered Fiume, he was greeted as a liberator. The the flesh which is too often
next day he was declared leader of the Free State of Fiume. Soon he was denied her by the real
husband, who thinks that
giving daily speeches from a balcony overlooking the town's main square,
men are gross and women
holding tens of thousands of people spellbound without benefit of loud- spiritual. To be the fatal
speakers. He initiated all kinds of celebrations and rituals harking back to Don Juan may be the
dream of a few men; but to
the Roman Empire. The citizens of Fiume began to imitate him, particu-
meet him is the dream of
larly his sexual exploits; the city became like a giant bordello. His popu- many women.
larity was so high that the Italian government feared a march on Rome,
—OSCAR MANDEL,"THE
which at that point, had D'Annunzio decided to do it—and he had the LEGEND OF DON JUAN," THE
support of a large part of the military—might actually have succeeded; THEATRE OF DON JUAN
D'Annunzio could have beaten Mussolini to the punch and changed the
course of history. (He was not a Fascist, but a kind of aesthetic socialist.)
He decided to stay in Fiume, however, and ruled there for sixteen months
before the Italian government finally bombed him out of the city.
Seduction is a psychological process that transcends gender, except in a few
key areas where each gender has its own weakness. The male is traditionally
vulnerable to the visual. The Siren who can concoct the right physical ap-
pearance will seduce in large numbers. For women the weakness is lan-
guage and words: as was written by one of D'Annunzio's victims, the
French actress Simone, "How can one explain his conquests except by his
extraordinary verbal power, and the musical timbre of his voice, put to the
service of exceptional eloquence? For my sex is susceptible to words, be-
witched by them, longing to be dominated by them."
The Rake is as promiscuous with words as he is with women. He
chooses words for their ability to suggest, insinuate, hypnotize, elevate, in-

[PAGE 52]
24 • The Art of Seduction
feet. The words of the Rake are the equivalent of the bodily adornment of
the Siren: a powerful sensual distraction, a narcotic. The Rake's use of lan-
guage is demonic because it is designed not to communicate or convey in-
formation but to persuade, flatter, stir emotional turmoil, much as the
serpent in the Garden of Eden used words to lead Eve into temptation.
The example of D'Annunzio reveals the link between the erotic Rake,
who seduces women, and the political Rake, who seduces the masses. Both
depend on words. Adapt the character of the Rake and you will find that
the use of words as a subtle poison has infinite applications. Remember: it
is the form that matters, not the content. The less your targets focus on
what you say, and the more on how it makes them feel, the more seductive
your effect. Give your words a lofty, spiritual, literary flavor the better to in-
sinuate desire in your unwitting victims.
But what is this force, then, by which Don Juan seduces?
It is desire, the energy of sensuous desire. He desires in
every woman the whole of womanhood. The reaction to
this gigantic passion beautifies and develops the one de-
sired, who flushes in enhanced beauty by his reflection. As
the enthusiast's fire with seductive splendor illumines even
those who stand in a casual relation to him, so Don Juan
transfigures in a far deeper sense every girl.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, EITHER/OR
Keys to the Character
At first it may seem strange that a man who is clearly dishonest, disloyal,
and has no interest in marriage would have any appeal to a woman.
But throughout all of history, and in all cultures, this type has had a fatal ef-
fect. What the Rake offers is what society normally does not allow women:
an affair of pure pleasure, an exciting brush with danger. A woman is often
deeply oppressed by the role she is expected to play She is supposed to be
the tender, civilizing force in society, and to want commitment and lifelong
loyalty. But often her marriages and relationships give her not romance and
devotion but routine and an endlessly distracted mate. It remains an abiding
female fantasy to meet a man who gives totally of himself, who lives for
her, even if only for a while.
This dark, repressed side of female desire found expression in the leg-
end of Don Juan. At first the legend was a male fantasy: the adventurous
knight who could have any woman he wanted. But in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, Don Juan slowly evolved from the masculine adven-
turer to a more feminized version: a man who lived only for women. This
evolution came from women's interest in the story, and was a result of their
frustrated desires. Marriage for them was a form of indentured servitude;
but Don Juan offered pleasure for its own sake, desire with no strings at-

[PAGE 53]
The Rake • 25
tached. For the time he crossed your path, you were all he thought about.
His desire for you was so powerful that he gave you no time to think or to
worry about the consequences. He would come in the night, give you an
unforgettable moment, and then vanish. He might have conquered a thou-
sand women before you, but that only made him more interesting; better to
be abandoned than undesired by such a man.
The great seducers do not offer the mild pleasures that society con-
dones. They touch a person's unconscious, those repressed desires that cry
out for liberation. Do not imagine that women are the tender creatures that
some people would like them to be. Like men, they are deeply attracted to
the forbidden, the dangerous, even the slightly evil. (Don Juan ends by go-
ing to hell, and the word "rake" comes from "rakehell," a man who rakes
the coals of hell; the devilish component, clearly, is an important part of
the fantasy.) Always remember: if you are to play the Rake, you must con-
vey a sense of risk and darkness, suggesting to your victim that she is partici-
pating in something rare and thrilling—a chance to play out her own rakish
desires.
To play the Rake, the most obvious requirement is the ability to let
yourself go, to draw a woman into the kind of purely sensual moment in
which past and future lose meaning. You must be able to abandon yourself
to the moment. (When the Rake Valmont—a character modeled after the
Duke de Richelieu—in Laclos' eighteenth-century novel Dangerous Liaisons
writes letters that are obviously calculated to have a certain effect on his
chosen victim, Madame de Tourvel, she sees right through them; but when
his letters really do burn with passion, she begins to relent.) An added
benefit of this quality is that it makes you seem unable to control yourself, a
display of weakness that a woman enjoys. By abandoning yourself to the
seduced, you make them feel that you exist for them alone—a feeling re-
flecting a truth, though a temporary one. Of the hundreds of women that
Pablo Picasso, consummate rake, seduced over the years, most of them had
the feeling that they were the only one he truly loved.
The Rake never worries about a woman's resistance to him, or for that
matter about any other obstacle in his path—a husband, a physical barrier.
Resistance is only the spur to his desire, enflaming him all the more. When
Picasso was seducing Françoise Gilot, in fact, he begged her to resist; he
needed resistance to add to the thrill. In any case, an obstacle in your way
gives you the opportunity to prove yourself, and the creativity you bring to
matters of love. In the eleventh-century Japanese novel The Tale of Genji, by
the court lady Murasaki Shikibu, the Rake Prince Niou is not disturbed by
the sudden disappearance of Ukifune, the woman he loves. She has fled be-
cause although she is interested in the prince, she is in love with another
man; but her absence allows the prince to go to extreme lengths to track
her down. His sudden appearance to whisk her away to a house deep in the
woods, and the gallantry he displays in doing so, overwhelm her. Remem-
ber: if no resistances or obstacles face you, you must create them. No se-
duction can proceed without them.

[PAGE 54]
26 • The Art of Seduction
The Rake is an extreme personality. Impudent, sarcastic, and bitingly
witty, he cares nothing for what anyone thinks. Paradoxically, this only
makes him more seductive. In the courtlike atmosphere of studio-era Holly-
wood, when most of the actors behaved like dutiful sheep, the great Rake
Errol Flynn stood out in his insolence. He defied the studio chiefs, engaged
in the most extreme pranks, reveled in his reputation as Hollywood's
supreme seducer—all of which enhanced his popularity. The Rake needs a
backdrop of convention—a stultified court, a humdrum marriage, a con-
servative culture—to shine, to be appreciated for the breath of fresh air he
provides. Never worry about going too far: the Rake's essence is that he
goes further than anyone else.
When the Earl of Rochester, seventeenth-century England's most no-
torious Rake and poet, abducted Elizabeth Malet, one of the most sought-
after young ladies of the court, he was duly punished. But lo and behold, a
few years later young Elizabeth, though wooed by the most eligible bache-
lors in the country, chose Rochester to be her husband. In demonstrating
his audacious desire, he made himself stand out from the crowd.
Related to the Rake's extremism is the sense of danger, taboo, perhaps
even the hint of cruelty about him. This was the appeal of another poet
Rake, one of the greatest in history: Lord Byron. Byron disliked any kind
of convention, and happily played this up. When he had an affair with his
half sister, who bore a child by him, he made sure that all of England knew
about it. He could be uncommonly cruel, as he was to his wife. But all of
this only made him that much more desirable. Danger and taboo appeal to
a repressed side in women, who are supposed to represent a civilizing, mor-
alizing force in culture. Just as a man may fall victim to the Siren through
his desire to be free of his sense of masculine responsibility, a woman may
succumb to the Rake through her yearning to be free of the constraints of
virtue and decency. Indeed it is often the most virtuous woman who falls
most deeply in love with the Rake.
Among the Rake's most seductive qualities is his ability to make women
want to reform him. How many thought they would be the one to tame
Lord Byron; how many of Picasso's women thought they would finally be
the one with whom he would spend the rest of his life. You must exploit
this tendency to the fullest. When caught red-handed in rakishness, fall
back on your weakness—your desire to change, and your inability to do so.
With so many women at your feet, what can you do? You are the one who
is the victim. You need help. Women will jump at this opportunity; they
are uncommonly indulgent of the Rake, for he is such a pleasant, dashing
figure. The desire to reform him disguises the true nature of their desire,
the secret thrill they get from him. When President Bill Clinton was clearly
caught out as a Rake, it was women who rushed to his defense, finding
every possible excuse for him. The fact that the Rake is so devoted to
women, in his own strange way, makes him lovable and seductive to them.
Finally, a Rake's greatest asset is his reputation. Never downplay your
bad name, or seem to apologize for it. Instead, embrace it, enhance it. It is

[PAGE 55]
The Rake • 27
what draws women to you. There are several things you must be known
for: your irresistible attractiveness to women; your uncontrollable devotion
to pleasure (this will make you seem weak, but also exciting to be around);
your disdain for convention; a rebellious streak that makes you seem dan-
gerous. This last element can be slightly hidden; on the surface, be polite
and civil, while letting it be known that behind the scenes you are incorri-
gible. Duke de Richelieu made his conquests as public as possible, exciting
other women's competitive desire to join the club of the seduced. It was by
reputation that Lord Byron attracted his willing victims. A woman may feel
ambivalent about President Clinton's reputation, but beneath that ambiva-
lence is an underlying interest. Do not leave your reputation to chance or
gossip; it is your life's artwork, and you must craft it, hone it, and display it
with the care of an artist.
Symbol: Fire.
The Rake burns with a desire that
enflames the woman he is seducing. It is
extreme, uncontrollable, and dangerous. The Rake may
end in hell, but the flames surrounding him often make
him seem that much more desirable to women.

[PAGE 56]
28 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Like the Siren, the Rake faces the most danger from members of his
own sex, who are far less indulgent than women are of his constant
skirt chasing. In the old days, a Rake was often an aristocrat, and no matter
how many people he offended or even killed, in the end he would go un-
punished. Today, only stars and the very wealthy can play the Rake with
impunity; the rest of us need to be careful.
Elvis Presley had been a shy young man. Attaining early stardom, and
seeing the power it gave him over women, he went berserk, becoming a
Rake almost overnight. Like many Rakes, Elvis had a predilection for
women who were already taken. He found himself cornered by an angry
husband or boyfriend on numerous occasions, and came away with a few
cuts and bruises. This might seem to suggest that you should step lightly
around husbands and boyfriends, especially early on in your career. But the
charm of the Rake is that such dangers don't matter to them. You cannot
be a Rake by being fearful and prudent; the occasional pummeling is part
of the game. Later on, in any case, at the height of Elvis's fame, no husband
would dare touch him.
The greater danger for the Rake comes not from the violently offended
husband but from those insecure men who feel threatened by the Don Juan
figure. Although they will not admit it, they envy the Rake's life of plea-
sure, and like everyone envious, they will attack in hidden ways, often
masking their persecutions as morality. The Rake may find his career en-
dangered by such men (or by the occasional woman who is equally inse-
cure, and who feels hurt because the Rake does not want her). There is
little the Rake can do to avoid envy; if everyone was as successful in seduc-
tion, society would not function.
So accept envy as a badge of honor. Don't be naive, be aware. When
attacked by a moralist persecutor, do not be taken in by their crusade; it is
motivated by envy, pure and simple. You can blunt it by being less of a
Rake, asking forgiveness, claiming to have reformed, but this will damage
your reputation, making you seem less lovably rakish. In the end, it is better
to suffer attacks with dignity and keep on seducing. Seduction is the source
of your power; and you can always count on the infinite indulgence of
women.

[PAGE 57]
Most
people have dreams in their
youth that get shattered or worn
down with age. They find themselves dis-
appointed by people, events, reality, which can-
not match their youthful ideals. Ideal Lovers thrive
on people's broken dreams, which become lifelong
fantasies. You long for romance? Adventure? Lofty
spiritual communion? The Ideal Lover reflects your
fantasy. He or she is an artist in creating the illu-
sion you require, idealizing your portrait. In a
world of disenchantment and baseness,
there is limitless seductive power in
following the path of the
Ideal Lover.

[PAGE 58]


[PAGE 59]
The Romantic Ideal
One evening around 1760, at the opera in the city of Cologne, a beau-
tiful young woman sat in her box, watching the audience. Beside her
was her husband, the town burgomaster—a middle-aged man and amiable
enough, but dull. Through her opera glasses the young woman noticed a
handsome man wearing a stunning outfit. Evidently her stare was noticed,
for after the opera the man introduced himself: his name was Giovanni Gi- If at first sight a girl does
acomo Casanova. not make such a deep
impression on a person that
The stranger kissed the woman's hand. She was going to a ball the fol-
she awakens the ideal,
lowing night, she told him; would he like to come? "If I might dare to then ordinarily the
hope, Madame," he replied, "that you will dance only with me." actuality is not especially
desirable; but if she does,
The next night, after the ball, the woman could think only of Casanova.
then no matter how
He had seemed to anticipate her thoughts—had been so pleasant, and yet
experienced a person is he
so bold. A few days later he dined at her house, and after her husband had usually is rather
retired for the evening she showed him around. In her boudoir she pointed overwhelmed.
out a wing of the house, a chapel, just outside her window. Sure enough, as —SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
if he had read her mind, Casanova came to the chapel the next day to at-
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
tend Mass, and seeing her at the theater that evening he mentioned to her EDNA H. HONG
that he had noticed a door there that must lead to her bedroom. She
laughed, and pretended to be surprised. In the most innocent of tones, he
said that he would find a way to hide in the chapel the next day—and al- A good lover will behave as
most without thinking, she whispered she would visit him there after every- elegantly at dawn as at any
other time. He drags
one had gone to bed.
himself out of bed with a
So Casanova hid in the chapel's tiny confessional, waiting all day and look of dismay on his face.
evening. There were rats, and he had nothing to lie upon; yet when the The lady urges him on:
"Come, my friend, it's
burgomaster's wife finally came, late at night, he did not complain, but qui-
getting light. You don't
etly followed her to her room. They continued their trysts for several days. want anyone to find you
By day she could hardly wait for night: finally something to live for, an ad-here." He gives a deep
sigh, as if to say that the
venture. She left him food, books, and candles to ease his long and tedious
night has not been nearly
stays in the chapel—it seemed wrong to use a place of worship for such a
long enough and that it is
purpose, but that only made the affair more exciting. A few days later, agony to leave. Once up,
however, she had to take a journey with her husband. By the time she got he does not instantly pull
on his trousers. Instead he
back, Casanova had disappeared, as quickly and gracefully as he had come.
comes close to the lady and
Some years later, in London, a young woman named Miss Pauline no- whispers whatever was left
ticed an ad in a local newspaper. A gentleman was looking for a lady lodger unsaid during the night.
Even when he is dressed,
to rent a part of his house. Miss Pauline came from Portugal, and was of
he still lingers, vaguely
the nobility; she had eloped to London with a lover, but he had been pretending to be fastening
31

[PAGE 60]
32 • The Art of Seduction
his sash. • Presently he forced to return home and she had had to stay on alone for some while be-
raises the lattice, and the fore she could join him. Now she was lonely, and had little money, and was
two lovers stand together by
depressed by her squalid circumstances—after all, she had been raised as a
the side door while he tells
her how he dreads the lady. She answered the ad.
coining day, which will The gentleman turned out to be Casanova, and what a gentleman he
keep them apart; then he was. The room he offered was nice, and the rent was low; he asked only for
slips away. The lady
occasional companionship. Miss Pauline moved in. They played chess, went
watches him go, and this
moment of parting will riding, discussed literature. He was so well-bred, polite, and generous. A se-
remain among her most rious and high-minded girl, she came to depend on their friendship; here
charming memories. •
was a man she could talk to for hours. Then one day Casanova seemed
Indeed, one's attachment to
a man depends largely on changed, upset, excited: he confessed that he was in love with her. She was
the elegance of his leave- going back to Portugal soon, to rejoin her lover, and this was not what she
taking. When he jumps
wanted to hear. She told him he should go riding to calm down.
out of bed, scurries about
the room, tightly fastens Later that evening she received news: he had fallen from his horse. Feel-
his trouser sash, rolls up ing responsible for his accident, she rushed to him, found him in bed, and
the sleeves of his court
fell into his arms, unable to control herself. The two became lovers that
cloak, overrobe, or hunting
night, and remained so for the rest of Miss Pauline's stay in London. Yet
costume, stuffs his
belongings into the breast when it came time for her to leave for Portugal, he did not try to stop her;
of his robe and then briskly instead, he comforted her, reasoning that each of them had offered the
secures the outer sash—one
other the perfect, temporary antidote to their loneliness, and that they
really begins to hate him.
would be friends for life.
—THE PILLOW BOOK OF SEI
Some years later, in a small Spanish town, a young and beautiful girl
SHONAGON, TRANSLATED AND
EDITED BY IVAN MORRIS named Ignazia was leaving church after confession. She was approached by
Casanova. Walking her home, he explained that he had a passion for danc-
ing the fandango, and invited her to a ball the following evening. He was so
different from anyone in the town, which bored her so—she desperately
wanted to go. Her parents were against the arrangement, but she persuaded
her mother to act as a chaperone. After an unforgettable evening of danc-
ing (and he danced the fandango remarkably well for a foreigner), Casa-
nova confessed that he was madly in love with her. She replied (very sadly,
though) that she already had a fiancé. Casanova did not force the issue, but
over the next few days he took Ignazia to more dances and to the bullfights.
On one of these occasions he introduced her to a friend of his, a duchess,
who flirted with him brazenly; Ignazia was terribly jealous. By now she was
desperately in love with Casanova, but her sense of duty and religion for-
bade such thoughts.
Finally, after days of torment, Ignazia sought out Casanova and took his
hand: "My confessor tried to make me promise to never be alone with you
again," she said, "and as I could not, he refused to give me absolution. It is
the first time in my life such a thing has happened to me. I have put myself
in God's hands. I have made up my mind, so long as you are here, to do all
you wish. When to my sorrow you leave Spain, I shall find another confes-
sor. My fancy for you is, after all, only a passing madness."
Casanova was perhaps the most successful seducer in history; few women
could resist him. His method was simple: on meeting a woman, he would

[PAGE 61]
The Ideal Lover • 33
study her, go along with her moods, find out what was missing in her life, During the early 1970s,
and provide it. He made himself the Ideal Lover. The bored burgomaster's against a turbulent political
backdrop that included the
wife needed adventure and romance; she wanted someone who would sac-
fiasco of American
rifice time and comfort to have her. For Miss Pauline what was missing was involvement in the
friendship, lofty ideals, serious conversation; she wanted a man of breeding Vietnam War and the
downfall of President
and generosity who would treat her like a lady. For Ignazia, what was miss-
Richard Nixon's
ing was suffering and torment. Her life was too easy; to feel truly alive, and
presidency in the Watergate
to have something real to confess, she needed to sin. In each case Casanova scandal, a "me generation"
adapted himself to the woman's ideals, brought her fantasy to life. Once she sprang to prominence—and
[Andy] Warhol was there
had fallen under his spell, a little ruse or calculation would seal the romance
to hold up its mirror.
(a day among rats, a contrived fall from a horse, an encounter with another Unlike the radicalized
woman to make Ignazia jealous). protesters of the 1960s
who wanted to change all
The Ideal Lover is rare in the modern world, for the role takes effort.
the ills of society, the self-
You will have to focus intensely on the other person, fathom what she is absorbed "me" people
missing, what he is disappointed by. People will often reveal this in subtle sought to improve their
bodies and to "get in
ways: through gesture, tone of voice, a look in the eye. By seeming to be
touch" with their own
what they lack, you will fit their ideal. feelings. They cared
To create this effect requires patience and attention to detail. Most passionately about their
appearance, health, life-
people are so wrapped up in their own desires, so impatient, they are inca-
style, and bank accounts.
pable of the Ideal Lover role. Let that be a source of infinite opportunity.
Andy catered to their self-
Be an oasis in the desert of the self-absorbed; few can resist the temptation centeredness and inflated
of following a person who seems so attuned to their desires, to bringing to pride by offering his
services as a portraitist. By
life their fantasies. And as with Casanova, your reputation as one who
the end of the decade, he
gives such pleasure will precede you and make your seductions that much would be internationally
recognized as one of the
leading portraitists of his
era. . . . • Warhol offered
The cultivation of the pleasures of the senses was ever my his clients an irresistible
principal aim in life. Knowing that I was personally calcu- product: a stylish and
lated to please the fair sex, I always strove to make myself flattering portrait by a
famous artist who was
agreeable to it.
himself a certified celebrity.
—CASANOVA Conferring an alluring star
presence upon even the
most celebrated of faces, he
transformed his subjects
The Beauty Ideal
into glamorous apparitions,
presenting their faces as he
In 1730, when Jeanne Poisson was a mere nine years old, a fortune-teller thought they wanted to be
seen and remembered. By
predicted that one day she would be the mistress of Louis XV. The pre- filtering his sitters' good
diction was quite ridiculous, since Jeanne came from the middle class, and features through his
silkscreens and
it was a tradition stretching back for centuries that the king's mistress be
exaggerating their vivacity,
chosen from among the nobility. To make matters worse, Jeanne's father he enabled them to gain
was a notorious rake, and her mother had been a courtesan. entree to a more mythic
and rarefied level of
Fortunately for Jeanne, one of her mother's lovers was a man of great
existence. The possession
wealth who took a liking to the pretty girl and paid for her education.
of great wealth and power
Jeanne learned to sing, to play the clavichord, to ride with uncommon skill, might do for everyday life,
to act and dance; she was schooled in literature and history as if she were a but the commissioning of a
portrait by Warhol was a
boy. The playwright Crébillon instructed her in the art of conversation.

[PAGE 62]
34 • The Art of Seduction
sure indication that the On top of it all, Jeanne was beautiful, and had a charm and grace that set
sitter intended to secure a her apart early on. In 1741, she married a man of the lower nobility. Now
posthumous fame as well.
known as Madame d'Etioles, she could realize a great ambition: she opened
Warhol's portraits were not
so much realistic documents a literary salon. All of the great writers and philosophers of the time fre-
of contemporary faces as quented the salon, many because they were enamored of the hostess. One
they were designer icons
of these was Voltaire, who became a lifelong friend.
awaiting future devotions.
Through all Jeanne's success, she never forgot the fortune-teller's pre-
—DAVID BOURDON, WARHOL
diction, and still believed that she would one day conquer the king's heart.
It happened that one of her husband's country estates bordered on King
Louis's favorite hunting grounds. She would spy on him through the fence,
Women have served all
or find ways to cross his path, always while she happened to be wearing an
these centuries as looking
glasses possessing the magic elegant, yet fetching outfit. Soon the king was sending her gifts of game.
and delicious power of When his official mistress died, in 1744, all of the court beauties vied to
reflecting the figure of a
take her place; but he began to spend more and more time with Madame
man at twice its natural
d'Etioles, dazzled by her beauty and charm. To the astonishment of the
size.
court, that same year he made this middle-class woman his official mistress,
—VIRGINIA WOOLF, A ROOM
OF ONE'S OWN ennobling her with the title of the Marquise de Pompadour.
The king's need for novelty was notorious: a mistress would beguile
him with her looks, but he would soon grow bored with her and find
someone else. After the shock of his choice of Jeanne Poisson wore off, the
courtiers reassured themselves that it could not last—that he had only cho-
sen her for the novelty of having a middle-class mistress. Little did they
know that Jeanne s first seduction of the king was not the last seduction she
had in mind.
As time went by, the king found himself visiting his mistress more and
more often. As he ascended the hidden stair that led from his quarters to
hers in the palace of Versailles, anticipation of the delights that awaited him
at the top would begin to turn his head. First, the room was always warm,
and was filled with delightful scents. Then there were the visual delights:
Madame de Pompadour always wore a different costume, each one elegant
and surprising in its own way. She loved beautiful objects—fine porcelain,
Chinese fans, golden flowerpots—and every time he visited, there would
be something new and enchanting to see. Her manner was always light-
hearted; she was never defensive or resentful. Everything for pleasure. Then
there was their conversation: he had never been really able to talk with a
woman before, or to laugh, but the marquise could discourse skillfully on
any subject, and her voice was a pleasure to hear. And if the conversation
waned, she would move to the piano, play a tune, and sing wonderfully.
If ever the king seemed bored or sad, Madame de Pompadour would
propose some project—perhaps the building of a new country house. He
would have to advise in the design, the layout of the gardens, the decor.
Back at Versailles, Madame de Pompadour put hersell in charge of the
palace amusements, building a private theater for weekly performances un-
der her direction. Actors were chosen from among the courtiers, but the
female lead was always played by Madame de Pompadour, who was one of
the finest amateur actresses in France. The king became obsessed with this

[PAGE 63]
The Ideal Lover • 35
theater; he could barely wait for its performances. Along with this interest
came an increasing expenditure of money on the arts, and an involvement
in philosophy and literature. A man who had cared only for hunting and
gambling was spending less and less time with his male companions and be-
coming a great patron of the arts. Indeed he stamped a whole era with an
aesthetic style, which became known as "Louis Quinze," rivaling the style
associated with his illustrious predecessor, Louis XIV.
Lo and behold, year after year went by without Louis tiring of his mis-
tress. In fact he made her a duchess, and her power and influence extended
well beyond culture into politics. For twenty years, Madame de Pompadour
ruled both the court and the king's heart, until her untimely death, in
1764, at the age of forty-three.
Louis XV had a powerful inferiority complex. The successor to Louis XIV,
the most powerful king in French history, he had been educated and
trained for the throne—yet who could follow his predecessor's act? Eventu-
ally he gave up trying, devoting himself instead to physical pleasures, which
came to define how he was seen; the people around him knew they could
sway him by appealing to the basest parts of his character.
Madame de Pompadour, genius of seduction, understood that inside
Louis XV was a great man yearning to come out, and that his obsession
with pretty young women indicated a hunger for a more lasting kind of
beauty. Her first step was to cure his incessant bouts of boredom. It is easy
for kings to be bored—everything they want is given to them, and they sel-
dom learn to be satisfied with what they have. The Marquise de Pom-
padour dealt with this by bringing all sorts of fantasies to life, and creating
constant suspense. She had many skills and talents, and just as important,
she deployed them so artfully that he never discovered their limits. Once
she had accustomed him to more refined pleasures, she appealed to the
crushed ideals within him; in the mirror she held up to him, he saw his as-
piration to be great, a desire that, in France, inevitably included leadership
in culture. His previous series of mistresses had tickled only his sensual de-
sires. In Madame de Pompadour he found a woman who made him feel
greatness in himself. The other mistresses could easily be replaced, but he
could never find another Madame de Pompadour.
Most people believe themselves to be inwardly greater than they out-
wardly appear to the world. They are full of unrealized ideals: they could
be artists, thinkers, leaders, spiritual figures, but the world has crushed
them, denied them the chance to let their abilities flourish. This is the key
to their seduction—and to keeping them seduced over time. The Ideal
Lover knows how to conjure up this kind of magic. Appeal only to people's
physical side, as many amateur seducers do, and they will resent you for
playing upon their basest instincts. But appeal to their better selves, to a
higher standard of beauty, and they will hardly notice that they have been
seduced. Make them feel elevated, lofty, spiritual, and your power over
them will be limitless.

[PAGE 64]
36 • The Art of Seduction
Love brings to light a lover's noble and hidden qualities—
his rare and exceptional traits: it is thus liable to be decep-
tive as to his normal character.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
Keys to the Character
Each of us carries inside us an ideal, either of what we would like to be-
come, or of what we want another person to be for us. This ideal goes
back to our earliest years—to what we once felt was missing in our lives,
what others did not give to us, what we could not give to ourselves. Maybe
we were smothered in comfort, and we long for danger and rebellion. If we
want danger but it frightens us, perhaps we look for someone who seems at
home with it. Or perhaps our ideal is more elevated—we want to be more
creative, nobler, and kinder than we ever manage to be. Our ideal is some-
thing we feel is missing inside us.
Our ideal may be buried in disappointment, but it lurks underneath,
waiting to be sparked. If another person seems to have that ideal quality, or
to have the ability to bring it out in us, we fall in love. That is the response
to Ideal Lovers. Attuned to what is missing inside you, to the fantasy that
will stir you, they reflect your ideal—and you do the rest, projecting on to
them your deepest desires and yearnings. Casanova and Madame de Pom-
padour did not merely seduce their targets into a sexual affair, they made
them fall in love.
The key to following the path of the Ideal Lover is the ability to ob-
serve. Ignore your targets' words and conscious behavior; focus on the tone
of their voice, a blush here, a look there—those signs that betray what
their words won't say. Often the ideal is expressed in contradiction. King
Louis XV seemed to care only about chasing deer and young girls, but that
in fact covered up his disappointment in himself; he yearned to have his no-
bler qualities flattered.
Never has there been a better moment than now to play the Ideal
Lover. That is because we live in a world in which everything must seem
elevated and well-intentioned. Power is the most taboo topic of all: al-
though it is the reality we deal with every day in our struggles with people,
there is nothing noble, self-sacrificing, or spiritual about it. Ideal Lovers
make you feel nobler, make the sensual and sexual seem spiritual and aes-
thetic. Like all seducers, they play with power, but they disguise their ma-
nipulations behind the facade of an ideal. Few people see through them
and their seductions last longer.
Some ideals resemble Jungian archetypes—they go back a long way
in our culture, and their hold is almost unconscious. One such dream is
that of the chivalrous knight. In the courtly love tradition of the Middle
Ages, a troubadour/knight would find a lady, almost always a married one,

[PAGE 65]
The Ideal Lover • 37
and would serve as her vassal. He would go through terrible trials on her
behalf, undertake dangerous pilgrimages in her name, suffer awful tortures
to prove his love. (This could include bodily mutilation, such as tearing off
of fingernails, the cutting of an ear, etc.) He would also write poems and
sing beautiful songs to her, for no troubadour could succeed without some
kind of aesthetic or spiritual quality to impress his lady. The key to the ar-
chetype is a sense of absolute devotion. A man who will not let matters of
warfare, glory, or money intrude into the fantasy of courtship has limitless
power. The troubadour role is an ideal because people who do not put
themselves and their own interests first are truly rare. For a woman to at-
tract the intense attention of such a man is immensely appealing to her
vanity.
In eighteenth-century Osaka, a man named Nisan took the courtesan
Dewa out walking, first taking care to sprinkle the clover bushes along the
path with water, which looked like morning dew. Dewa was greatly moved
by this beautiful sight. "I have heard," she said, "that loving couples of deer
are wont to lie behind clover bushes. How I should like to see this in real
life!" Nisan had heard enough. That very day he had a section of her house
torn down and ordered the planting of dozens of clover bushes in what had
once been a part of her bedroom. That night, he arranged for peasants to
round up wild deer from the mountains and bring them to the house. The
next day Dewa awoke to precisely the scene she had described. Once she
appeared overwhelmed and moved, he had the clover and deer taken away
and the house rebuilt.
One of history's most gallant lovers, Sergei Saltykov, had the misfortune
to fall in love with one of history's least available women: the Grand Duchess
Catherine, future empress of Russia. Catherine's every move was watched
over by her husband, Peter, who suspected her of trying to cheat on him
and appointed servants to keep an eye on her. She was isolated, unloved,
and unable to do anything about it. Saltykov, a handsome young army offi-
cer, was determined to be her rescuer. In 1752 he befriended Peter, and
also the couple in charge of watching over Catherine. In this way he was
able to see her and occasionally exchange a word or two with her that re-
vealed his intentions. He performed the most foolhardy and dangerous ma-
neuvers to be able to see her alone, including diverting her horse during a
royal hunt and riding off into the forest with her. He told her how much
he sympathized with her plight, and that he would do anything to help her.
To be caught courting Catherine would have meant death, and eventu-
ally Peter came to suspect that something was up between his wife and
Saltykov, though he was never sure. His enmity did not discourage the
dashing officer, who just put still more energy and ingenuity into finding
ways to arrange secret trysts. The couple were lovers for two years, and
Saltykov was undoubtedly the father of Catherine's son Paul, later the em-
peror of Russia. When Peter finally got rid of him by sending him off to
Sweden, news of his gallantry traveled ahead of him, and women swooned

[PAGE 66]
38 • The Art of Seduction
to be his next conquest. You may not have to go to as much trouble or risk,
but you will always be rewarded for actions that reveal a sense of self-
sacrifice or devotion.
The embodiment of the Ideal Lover for the 1920s was Rudolph Valen-
tino, or at least the image created of him in film. Everything he did—the
gifts, the flowers, the dancing, the way he took a woman's hand—showed a
scrupulous attention to the details that would signify how much he was
thinking of her. The image was of a man who made courtship take time,
transforming it into an aesthetic experience. Men hated Valentino, because
women now expected them to match the ideal of patience and attentive-
ness that he represented. Yet nothing is more seductive than patient atten-
tiveness. It makes the affair seem lofty, aesthetic, not really about sex. The
power of a Valentino, particularly nowadays, is that people like this are so
rare. The art of playing to a woman's ideal has almost disappeared—which
only makes it that much more alluring.
If the chivalrous lover remains the ideal for women, men often idealize
the Madonna/whore, a woman who combines sensuality with an air of
spirituality or innocence. Think of the great courtesans of the Italian Re-
naissance, such as Tullia d'Aragona—essentially a prostitute, like all courte-
sans, but able to disguise her social role by establishing a reputation as a poet
and philosopher. Tullia was what was then known as an "honest courtesan."
Honest courtesans would go to church, but they had an ulterior motive: for
men, their presence at Mass was exciting. Their houses were pleasure
palaces, but what made these homes so visually delightful was their art-
works and shelves full of books, volumes of Petrarch and Dante. For the
man, the thrill, the fantasy, was to sleep with a woman who was sexual yet
had the ideal qualities of a mother and the spirit and intellect of an artist.
Where the pure prostitute excited desire but also disgust, the honest cour-
tesan made sex seem elevated and innocent, as if it were happening in the
Garden of Eden. Such women held immense power over men. To this day
they remain an ideal, if for no other reason than that they offer such a range
of pleasures. The key is ambiguity—to combine the appearance of sensi-
tivity to the pleasures of the flesh with an air of innocence, spirituality, a
poetic sensibility. This mix of the high and the low is immensely seductive.
The dynamics of the Ideal Lover have limitless possibilities, not all of
them erotic. In politics, Talleyrand essentially played the role of the Ideal
Lover with Napoleon, whose ideal in both a cabinet minister and a friend
was a man who was aristocratic, smooth with the ladies—all the things that
Napoleon himself was not. In 1798, when Talleyrand was the French for-
eign minister, he hosted a party in Napoleon's honor after the great gen-
eral's dazzling military victories in Italy. To the day Napoleon died, he
remembered this party as the best he had ever attended. It was a lavish af-
fair, and Talleyrand wove a subtle message into it by placing Roman busts
around the house, and by talking to Napoleon of reviving the imperial glo-
ries of ancient Rome. This sparked a glint in the leader's eye, and indeed, a
few years later, Napoleon gave himself the title of emperor—a move that

[PAGE 67]
The Ideal Lover • 39
only made Talleyrand more powerful. The key to Talleyrand's power was
his ability to fathom Napoleon's secret ideal: his desire to be an emperor, a
dictator. Talleyrand simply held up a mirror to Napoleon and let him
glimpse that possibility. People are always vulnerable to insinuations like
this, which stroke their vanity, almost everyone's weak spot. Hint at some-
thing for them to aspire to, reveal your faith in some untapped potential
you see in them, and you will soon have them eating out of your hand.
If Ideal Lovers are masters at seducing people by appealing to their
higher selves, to something lost from their childhood, politicians can bene-
fit by applying this skill on a mass scale, to an entire electorate. This was
what John F. Kennedy quite deliberately did with the American public,
most obviously in creating the "Camelot" aura around himself. The word
"Camelot" was applied to his presidency only after his death, but the ro-
mance he consciously projected through his youth and good looks was fully
functioning during his lifetime. More subtly, he also played with America's
images of its own greatness and lost ideals. Many Americans felt that with
the wealth and comfort of the late 1950s had come great losses; ease and
conformity had buried the country's pioneer spirit. Kennedy appealed to
those lost ideals through the imagery of the New Frontier, which was ex-
emplified by the space race. The American instinct for adventure could
find outlets here, even if most of them were symbolic. And there were
other calls for public service, such as the creation of the Peace Corps.
Through appeals like these, Kennedy resparked the uniting sense of mission
that had gone missing in America during the years since World War II. He
also attracted to himself a more emotional response than presidents com-
monly got. People literally fell in love with him and the image.
Politicians can gain seductive power by digging into a country's past,
bringing images and ideals that have been abandoned or repressed back to
the surface. They only need the symbol; they do not really have to worry
about re-creating the reality behind it. The good feelings they stir up are
enough to ensure a positive response.
Symbol: The
Portrait Painter. Under his eye, all of
your physical imperfections disappear. He brings
out noble qualities in you, frames you in a myth, makes
you godlike, immortalizes you. For his ability to create
such fantasies, he is rewarded with great power.

[PAGE 68]
40 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
The main dangers in the role of the Ideal Lover are the consequences
that arise if you let reality creep in. You are creating a fantasy that in-
volves an idealization of your own character. And this is a precarious task,
for you are human, and imperfect. If your faults are ugly enough, or intru-
sive enough, they will burst the bubble you have blown, and your target
will revile you. Whenever Tullia d'Aragona was caught acting like a com-
mon prostitute (when, for instance, she was caught having an affair just for
money), she would have to leave town and establish herself elsewhere. The
fantasy of her as a spiritual figure was broken. Casanova too faced this dan-
ger, but was usually able to surmount it by finding a clever way to break off
the relationship before the woman realized that he was not what she had
imagined: he would find some excuse to leave town, or, better still, he
would choose a victim who was herself leaving town soon, and whose
awareness that the affair would be short-lived would make her idealizing of
him all the more intense. Reality and long intimate exposure have a way of
dulling a person's perfection. The nineteenth-century poet Alfred de Mus-
set was seduced by the writer George Sand, whose larger-than-life charac-
ter appealed to his romantic nature. But when the couple visited Venice
together, and Sand came down with dysentery, she was suddenly no longer
an idealized figure but a woman with an unappealing physical problem. De
Musset himself showed a whiny, babyish side on this trip, and the lovers
separated. Once apart, however, they were able to idealize each other again,
and reunited a few months later. When reality intrudes, distance is often a
solution.
In politics the dangers are similar. Years after Kennedy's death, a string
of revelations (his incessant sexual affairs, his excessively dangerous
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, etc.) belied the myth he had created. His
image has survived this tarnishing; poll after poll shows that he is still
revered. Kennedy is a special case, perhaps, in that his assassination made
him a martyr, reinforcing the process of idealization that he had already set
in motion. But he is not the only example of an Ideal Lover whose attrac-
tion survives unpleasant revelations; these figures unleash such powerful
fantasies, and there is such a hunger for the myths and ideals they have to
sell, that they are often quickly forgiven. Still, it is always wise to be pru-
dent, and to keep people from glimpsing the less-than-ideal side of your
character.

[PAGE 69]
Most
of us feel trapped within the
limited roles that the world expects us to
play. We are instantly attracted to those who are
more fluid, more ambiguous, than we are—those who
create their own persona. Dandies excite us because they can-
not be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for ourselves.
They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their
own physical image, which is always startling; they are mysteri-
ous and elusive. They also appeal to the narcissism of each
sex: to a woman they are psychologically female, to a man
they are male. Dandies fascinate and seduce in large
numbers. Use the power of the Dandy to create
an ambiguous, alluring presence that
stirs repressed desires.

[PAGE 70]


[PAGE 71]
The Feminine Dandy
When the eighteen-year-old Rodolpho Guglielmi emigrated from
Italy to the United States in 1913, he came with no particular skills
apart from his good looks and his dancing prowess. To put these qualities to
advantage, he found work in the thes dansants, the Manhattan dance halls
where young girls would go alone or with friends and hire a taxi dancer for
a brief thrill. The taxi dancer would expertly twirl them around the dance
Once a son was born to
floor, flirting and chatting, all for a small fee. Guglielmi soon made a name Mercury and the goddess
as one of the best—so graceful, poised, and pretty. Venus, and he was brought
up by the naiads in Ida's
In working as a taxi dancer, Guglielmi spent a great deal of time around
caves. In his features, it
women. He quickly learned what pleased them—how to mirror them in was easy to trace
subtle ways, how to put them at ease (but not too much). He began to pay resemblance to his father
and to his mother. He was
attention to his clothes, creating his own dapper look: he danced with a
called after them, too, for
corset under his shirt to give himself a trim figure, sported a wristwatch his name was
(considered effeminate in those days), and claimed to be a marquis. In 1915, Hermaphroditus. As soon
as he was fifteen, he left
he landed a job demonstrating the tango in fancy restaurants, and changed
his native hills, and Ida
his name to the more evocative Rodolpho di Valentina. A year later he
where he had been brought
moved to Los Angeles: he wanted to try to make it in Hollywood. up, and for the sheer joy of
Now known as Rudolph Valentino, Guglielmi appeared as an extra in travelling visited remote
places. . . .He went as far
several low-budget pictures. He eventually landed a somewhat larger role in
as the cities of Lycia, and
the 1919 film Eyes of Youth, in which he played a seducer, and caught on to the Carians, who
women's attention by how different a seducer he was: his movements were dwell nearby. In this region
he spied a pool of water, so
graceful and delicate, his skin so smooth and his face so pretty that when
clear that he could see right
he swooped down on his victim and drowned her protests with a kiss, he to the bottom. . . . The
seemed more thrilling than sinister. Next came The Four Horsemen of the water was like crystal, and
the edges of the pool were
Apocalypse, in which Valentino played the male lead, Julio the playboy, and
ringed with fresh turf and
became an overnight sex symbol through a tango sequence in which he se- grass that was always
duced a young woman by leading her through the dance. The scene encap- green. A nymph
[Salmacis] dwelt
sulated the essence of his appeal: his feet smooth and fluid, his poise almost
there. . . . Often she would
feminine, combined with an air of control. Female members of the audi-
gather flowers, and it so
ence literally swooned as he raised a married woman's hands to his lips, or happened that she was
shared the fragrance of a rose with his lover. He seemed so much more at- engaged in this pastime
when she caught sight of
tentive to women than other men did; but mixed in with this delicacy was
the boy, Hermaphroditus.
a hint of cruelty and menace that drove women wild. As soon as she had seen
In his most famous film, The Sheik, Valentino played an Arab prince him, she longed to possess
him. . . .She addressed
(later revealed to be a Scottish lord abandoned in the Sahara as a baby) who
him: "Fair boy, you surely
rescues a proud English lady in the desert, then conquers her in a manner deserve to be thought a
43

[PAGE 72]
44 • The Art of Seduction
god. If you are, perhaps that borders on rape. When she asks, "Why have you brought me here?,"
you may be Cupid? . . . If he replies, "Are you not woman enough to know?" Yet she ends up falling
there is such a girl [engaged
in love with him, as indeed women did in movie audiences all over the
to you], let me enjoy your
love in secret: but if there is world, thrilling at his strange blend of the feminine and the masculine. In
not, then I pray that I may one scene in The Sheik, the English lady points a gun at Valentino; his re-
be your bride, and that we
sponse is to point a delicate cigarette holder back at her. She wears pants;
may enter upon marriage
he wears long flowing robes and abundant eye makeup. Later films would
together." The naiad said
no more; but a blush include scenes of Valentino dressing and undressing, a kind of striptease
stained the boy's cheeks, for showing glimpses of his trim body. In almost all of his films he played some
he did not know what love
exotic period character—a Spanish bullfighter, an Indian rajah, an Arab
was. Even blushing became
him: his cheeks were the sheik, a French nobleman—and he seemed to delight in dressing up in jew-
colour of ripe apples, els and tight uniforms.
hanging in a sunny orchard,
In the 1920s, women were beginning to play with a new sexual free-
like painted ivory or like
the moon when, in eclipse, dom. Instead of waiting for a man to be interested in them, they wanted to
she shows a reddish hue be able to initiate the affair, but they still wanted the man to end up sweep-
beneath her brightness. . . .
ing them off their feet. Valentino understood this perfectly. His off-screen
Incessantly the nymph
demanded at least sisterly life corresponded to his movie image: he wore bracelets on his arm, dressed
kisses, and tried to put her impeccably, and reportedly was cruel to his wife, and hit her. (His adoring
arms round his ivory neck. public carefully ignored his two failed marriages and his apparently nonex-
"Will you stop!" he cried,
istent sex life.) When he suddenly died—in New York in August 1926, at
"or I shall run away and
leave this place and you!" the age of thirty-one, from complications after surgery for an ulcer—the
Salmacis was afraid: "1 response was unprecedented: more than 100,000 people filed by his coffin,
yield the spot to you,
many female mourners became hysterical, and the whole nation was spell-
stranger, I shall not
intrude," she said; and, bound. Nothing like this had happened before for a mere actor.
turning from him, pretended
to go away. . . . The boy,
There is a film of Valentino's, Monsieur Beaucaire, in which he plays a total
meanwhile, thinking
himself unobserved and fop, a much more effeminate role than he normally played, and without his
alone, strolled this way and usual hint of dangerousness. The film was a flop. Women did not respond
that on the grassy sward,
to Valentino as a swish. They were thrilled by the ambiguity of a man who
and dipped his toes in the
shared many of their own feminine traits, yet remained a man. Valentino
lapping water—then his
feet, up to the ankles. dressed and played with his physicality like a woman, but his image was
Then, tempted by the masculine. He wooed as a woman would woo if she were a man—slowly,
enticing coolness of the
attentively, paying attention to details, setting a rhythm instead of hurrying
waters, he quickly stripped
his young body of its soft to a conclusion. Yet when the time came for boldness and conquest, his
garments. At the sight, timing was impeccable, overwhelming his victim and giving her no chance
Salmacis was spell-bound.
to protest. In his movies, Valentino practiced the same gigolo's art of leading
She was on fire with
passion to possess his a woman on that he had mastered as a teenager on the dance floor—
naked beauty, and her very chatting, flirting, pleasing, but always in control.
eyes flamed with a
Valentino remains an enigma to this day. His private life and his charac-
brilliance like that of the
dazzling sun, when his ter are wrapped in mystery; his image continues to seduce as it did during
bright disc is reflected in a his lifetime. He served as the model for Elvis Presley, who was obsessed
mirror. . . . She longed to
with this star of the silents, and also for the modern male dandy who plays
embrace him then, and
with gender but retains an edge of danger and cruelty.
with difficulty restrained
her frenzy. Seduction was and will always remain the female form of power and
Hermaphroditus, clapping warfare. It was originally the antidote to rape and violence. The man who
his hollow palms against
uses this form of power on a woman is in essence turning the game around,

[PAGE 73]
The Dandy • 45
employing feminine weapons against her; without losing his masculine his body, dived quickly into
identity, the more subtly feminine he becomes the more effective the se- the stream. As he raised
first one arm and then the
duction. Do not be one of those who believe that what is most seductive is
other, his body gleamed in
being devastatingly masculine. The Feminine Dandy has a much more sin-
the clear water, as if
ister effect. He lures the woman in with exactly what she wants—a familiar, someone had encased
pleasing, graceful presence. Mirroring feminine psychology, he displays at- anivory statue or white
lilies in transparent glass.
tention to his appearance, sensitivity to detail, a slight coquettishness—but
"I have won! He is
also a hint of male cruelty. Women are narcissists, in love with the charms mine!" cried the nymph,
of their own sex. By showing them feminine charm, a man can mesmerize and flinging aside her
garments, plunged into the
and disarm them, leaving them vulnerable to a bold, masculine move.
heart of the pool. The boy
The Feminine Dandy can seduce on a mass scale. No single woman fought against her, but she
really possesses him—he is too elusive—but all can fantasize about doing so. held him, and snatched
kisses as he struggled,
The key is ambiguity: your sexuality is decidedly heterosexual, but your
placing her hands beneath
body and psychology float delightfully back and forth between the two him, stroking
poles. his unwilling breast, and
clinging to him, now on
this side, and now on that.
I am a woman. Every artist is a woman and should have a
• Finally, in spite of ail his
taste for other women. Artists who are homosexual cannot efforts to slip from her
be true artists because they like men, and since they them- grasp, she twined around
selves are women they are reverting to normality. him, like a serpent when it
is being carried off into the
—PABLO PICASSO air by the king of birds: for,
as it hangs from the eagle's
beak, the snake coils round
his head and talons and
The Masculine Dandy
with its tail hampers his
beating wings. . . ."You
In the 1870s, Pastor Henrik Gillot was the darling of the St. Petersburg may fight, you rogue, but
you will not escape. May
intelligentsia. He was young, handsome, well-read in philosophy and lit-
the gods grant me this, may
erature, and he preached a kind of enlightened Christianity. Dozens of no time to come ever
young girls had crushes on him and would flock to his sermons just to look separate him from me, or
me from him!" Her prayers
at him. In 1878, however, he met a girl who changed his life. Her name
found favour with the gods:
was Lou von Salomé (later known as Lou Andreas-Salomé), and she was for, as they lay together,
seventeen; he was forty-two. their bodies were united
and from being two persons
Salomé was pretty, with radiant blue eyes. She had read a lot, particu-
they became one. As when
larly for a girl her age, and was interested in the gravest philosophical and a gardener grafts a branch
religious issues. Her intensity, her intelligence, her responsiveness to ideas on to a tree, and sees the
two unite as they grow,
cast a spell over Gillot. When she entered his office for her increasingly fre-
and come to maturity
quent discussions with him, the place seemed brighter and more alive. Per- together, so when their
haps she was flirting with him, in the unconscious manner of a young limbs met in that clinging
embrace the nymph and the
girl—yet when Gillot admitted to himself that he was in love with her, and
boy were no longer two, but
proposed marriage, Salomé was horrified. The confused pastor never quite
a single form, possessed of
got over Lou von Salomé, becoming the first of a long string of famous a dual nature, which could
men to be the victim of a lifelong unfulfilled infatuation with her. not be called male or
female, but seemed to be at
In 1882, the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche was wandering
once both and neither.
around Italy alone. In Genoa he received a letter from his friend Paul Rée,
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
a Prussian philosopher whom he admired, recounting his discussions with a
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
remarkable young Russian woman, Lou von Salomé, in Rome. Salomé was

[PAGE 74]
46 • The Art of Seduction
Dandyism is not even, as there on holiday with her mother; Rée had managed to accompany her on
many unthinking people long walks through the city, unchaperoned, and they had had many conver-
seem to suppose, an
sations. Her ideas on God and Christianity were quite similar to Nietz-
immoderate interest in
personal appearance and sche's, and when Rée had told her that the famous philosopher was a friend
material elegance. For the of his, she had insisted that he invite Nietzsche to join them. In subsequent
true dandy these things are
letters Ree described how mysteriously captivating Salomé was, and how
only a symbol oj the
anxious she was to meet Nietzsche. The philosopher soon went to Rome.
aristocratic superiority of his
personality. . . . • What, When Nietzsche finally met Salomé, he was overwhelmed. She had the
then, is this ruling passion most beautiful eyes he had ever seen, and during their first long talk those
that has turned into a creed
eyes lit up so intensely that he could not help feeling there was something
and created its own skilled
tyrants? What is this erotic about her excitement. Yet he was also confused: Salomé kept her dis-
unwritten constitution that tance, and did not respond to his compliments. What a devilish young
has created so haughty a
woman. A few days later she read him a poem of hers, and he cried; her
caste? It is, above all, a
burning need to acquire ideas about life were so like his own. Deciding to seize the moment, Nietz-
originality, within the sche proposed marriage. (He did not know that Ree had done so as well.)
apparent bounds of
Salomé declined. She was interested in philosophy, life, adventure, not mar-
convention. It is a sort of
cult of oneself, which can riage. Undaunted, Nietzsche continued to court her. On an excursion to
dispense even with what are Lake Orta with Rée, Salomé, and her mother, he managed to get the girl
commonly called illusions. It alone, accompanying her on a walk up Monte Sacro while the others stayed
is the delight in causing
behind. Apparently the views and Nietzsche's words had the proper pas-
astonishment, and the
proud satisfaction of sionate effect; in a later letter to her, he described this walk as "the most
never oneself being beautiful dream of my life." Now he was a man possessed: all he could
astonished. . . .
think about was marrying Salomé and having her all to himself.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE A few months later Salomé visited Nietzsche in Germany. They took
DANDY, QUOTED IN VICE: AN
long walks together, and stayed up all night discussing philosophy. She mir-
ANTHOLOGY, EDITED BY
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES rored his deepest thoughts, anticipated his ideas about religion. Yet when
he again proposed marriage, she scolded him as conventional: it was Nietz-
sche, after all, who had developed a philosophical defense of the superman,
In the midst of this display the man above everyday morality, yet Salomé was by nature far less conven-
of statesmanship,
tional than he was. Her firm, uncompromising manner only deepened the
eloquence, cleverness, and
spell she cast over him, as did her hint of cruelty When she finally left him,
exalted ambition,
Alcibiades lived a life of making it clear that she had no intention of marrying him, Nietzsche was
prodigious luxury, devastated. As an antidote to his pain, he wrote Thus Spake Zarathustra, a
drunkenness, debauchery,
book full of sublimated eroticism and deeply inspired by his talks with her.
and insolence. He was
effeminate in his dress and From then on Salomé was known throughout Europe as the woman who
would walk through the had broken Nietzsche's heart.
market-place trailing his
Salomé moved to Berlin. Soon the city's greatest intellectuals were
long purple robes, and he
spent extravagantly. He falling under the spell of her independence and free spirit. The playwrights
had the decks of his Gerhart Hauptmann and Franz Wedekind became infatuated with her; in
triremes cut away to allow
1897, the great Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke fell in love with her. By
him to sleep more
comfortably, and his that time her reputation was widely known, and she was a published novel-
bedding was slung on cords, ist. This certainly played a part in seducing Rilke, but he was also attracted
rather than spread on the by a kind of masculine energy he found in her that he had never seen in a
hard planks. He had a
woman. Rilke was then twenty-two, Salomé thirty-six. He wrote her love
golden shield made for
him, which was letters and poems, followed her everywhere, and began an affair with her
emblazoned not with any that was to last several years. She corrected his poetry, imposed discipline

[PAGE 75]
The Dandy • 41
on his overly romantic verse, inspired ideas for new poems. But she was put ancestral device, but with
off by his childish dependence on her, his weakness. Unable to stand weak- the figure of Eros armed
with a thunderbolt. The
ness of any kind, she eventually left him. Consumed by her memory, Rilke
leading men of Athens
long continued to pursue her. In 1926, lying on his deathbed, he begged
watched all this with
his doctors, "Ask Lou what is wrong with me. She is the only one who disgust and indignation
knows." and they were deeply
disturbed by his
One man wrote of Salomé, "There was something terrifying about her
contemptuous and lawless
embrace. Looking at you with her radiant blue eyes, she would say, 'The behaviour, which seemed to
reception of the semen is for me the height of ecstasy.' And she had an in- them monstrous and
suggested the habits of a
satiable appetite for it. She was completely amoral ... a vampire." The
tyrant. The people's feelings
Swedish psychotherapist Poul Bjerre, one of her later conquests, wrote, "I towards him have been very
think Nietzsche was right when he said that Lou was a thoroughly evil aptly expressed by
Aristophanes in the line:
woman. Evil however in the Goethean sense: evil that produces good. . . .
"They long for him, they
She may have destroyed lives and marriages but her presence was exciting." hate him, they cannot do
without him. . . ." • The
fact was that his voluntary
The two emotions that almost every male felt in the presence of Lou
donations, the public shows
Andreas-Salomé were confusion and excitement—the two prerequisite
he supported, his unrivalled
feelings for any successful seduction. People were intoxicated by her strange munificence to the state, the
mix of the masculine and the feminine; she was beautiful, with a radiant fame of his ancestry, the
power of his oratory and
smile and a graceful, flirtatious manner, but her independence and her in-
his physical strength and
tensely analytical nature made her seem oddly male. This ambiguity was beauty . . . all combined to
expressed in her eyes, which were both coquettish and probing. It was con- make the Athenians forgive
him everything else, and
fusion that kept men interested and curious: no other woman was like this.
they were constantly finding
They wanted to know more. The excitement stemmed from her ability to euphemisms for his lapses
stir up repressed desires. She was a complete nonconformist, and to be in- and putting them down to
youthful high spirits
volved with her was to break all kinds of taboos. Her masculinity made the
and honourable ambition.
relationship seem vaguely homosexual; her slightly cruel, slightly domi-
—PLUTARCH,"THE LIFE OF
neering streak could stir up masochistic yearnings, as it did in Nietzsche.
ALCIBIADES," THE RISE AND
Salomé radiated a forbidden sexuality. Her powerful effect on men—the FALL OF ATHENS: NINE GREEK
lifelong infatuations, the suicides (there were several), the periods of intense LIVES, TRANSLATED BY IAN
SCOTT-KILVERT
creativity, the descriptions of her as a vampire or a devil—attest to the ob-
scure depths of the psyche that she was able to reach and disturb.
The Masculine Dandy succeeds by reversing the normal pattern of
male superiority in matters of love and seduction. A man's apparent inde- Further light—a whole
flood of it—is thrown
pendence, his capacity for detachment, often seems to give him the upper
upon this attraction of
hand in the dynamic between men and women. A purely feminine woman the male in petticoats for
will arouse desire, but is always vulnerable to the man's capricious loss of the female, in the diary
of the Abbé de Choisy, one
interest; a purely masculine woman, on the other hand, will not arouse that
of the most brilliant men-
interest at all. Follow the path of the Masculine Dandy, however, and you
women of history, of whom
neutralize all a man's powers. Never give completely of yourself; while you we shall hear a great deal
are passionate and sexual, always retain an air of independence and self- more later. The abbé, a
churchman of Paris, was a
possession. You might move on to the next man, or so he will think. You
constant masquerader in
have other, more important matters to concern yourself with, such as your female attire. He lived in
work. Men do not know how to fight women who use their own weapons the days of Louis XIV, and
was a great friend of Louis'
against them; they are intrigued, aroused, and disarmed. Few men can resist
brother, also addicted to
the taboo pleasures offered up to them by the Masculine Dandy. women's clothes. A young

[PAGE 76]
48 • The Art of Seduction
girl, Mademoiselle The seduction emanating from a person of uncertain or dis-
Charlotte, thrown much simulated sex is powerful.
into his company, fell
desperately in love with the —COLETTE
abbé, and when the affair
had progressed to a
liaison, the abbé asked her Keys to the Character
how she came to be won . . .
• "I stood in no need of
caution as I should have Many of us today imagine that sexual freedom has progressed in recent
with a man. I saw nothing years—that everything has changed, for better or worse. This is
but a beautiful woman,
mostly an illusion; a reading of history reveals periods of licentiousness
and why should I be
forbidden to love you? (imperial Rome, late-seventeenth-century England, the "floating world" of
What advantages a eighteenth-century Japan) far in excess of what we are currently experi-
woman's dress gives you!
encing. Gender roles are certainly changing, but they have changed before.
The heart of a man is
Society is in a state of constant flux, but there is something that does not
there, and that makes a
great impression upon us, change: the vast majority of people conform to whatever is normal for the
and on the other hand, all time. They play the role allotted to them. Conformity is a constant because
the charms of the fair sex
humans are social creatures who are always imitating one another. At cer-
fascinate us, and prevent us
from taking precautions. " tain points in history it may be fashionable to be different and rebellious,
but if a lot of people are playing that role, there is nothing different or re-
—C.J. BULLIET,
VENUS CASTINA bellious about it.
We should never complain about most people's slavish conformity,
however, for it offers untold possibilities of power and seduction to those
who are up for a few risks. Dandies have existed in all ages and cultures (Al-
Beau Brummell was
regarded as unbalanced in cibiades in ancient Greece, Korechika in late-tenth-century Japan), and
his passion for daily wherever they have gone they have thrived on the conformist role playing
ablutions. His ritualistic
of others. The Dandy displays a true and radical difference from other peo-
morning toilet took upward
of five hours, one hour ple, a difference of appearance and manner. Since most of us are secretly
spent inching himself into oppressed by our lack of freedom, we are drawn to those who are more
his skin-tight buckskin
fluid and flaunt their difference.
breeches, an hour with the
hairdresser and another two Dandies seduce socially as well as sexually; groups form around them,
hours tying and "creasing their style is wildly imitated, an entire court or crowd will fall in love
down" a series of starched
with them. In adapting the Dandy character for your own purposes, re-
cravats until perfection was
achieved. But first of all member that the Dandy is by nature a rare and beautiful flower. Be differ-
two hours were spent ent in ways that are both striking and aesthetic, never vulgar; poke fun at
scrubbing himself with
current trends and styles, go in a novel direction, and be supremely uninter-
fetish zeal from head to toe
ested in what anyone else is doing. Most people are insecure; they will
in milk, water and eau de
Cologne. . . . Beau wonder what you are up to, and slowly they will come to admire and imi-
Brummell said he used tate you, because you express yourself with total confidence.
only the froth of
The Dandy has traditionally been defined by clothing, and certainly
champagne to polish his
Hessian boots. He had most Dandies create a unique visual style. Beau Brummel, the most famous
365 snuff boxes, those Dandy of all, would spend hours on his toilette, particularly the inimitably
suitable for summer wear
styled knot in his necktie, for which he was famous throughout early-
being quite unthinkable in
winter, and the fit of his nineteenth-century England. But a Dandy's style cannot be obvious, for
gloves was achieved by Dandies are subtle, and never try hard for attention—attention comes to
entrusting their cut to two
them. The person whose clothes are flagrantly different has little imagina-
firms—one for the fingers,
the other for the thumbs. tion or taste. Dandies show their difference in the little touches that mark

[PAGE 77]
The Dandy • 49
their disdain for convention: Théophile Gautier's red vest, Oscar Wilde's Sometimes, however, the
green velvet suit, Andy Warhol's silver wigs. The great English Prime Min- tyranny of elegance became
altogether insupportable. A
ister Benjamin Disraeli had two magnificent canes, one for morning, one
Mr. Boothby committed
for evening; at noon he would change canes, no matter where he was. The
suicide and left a note
female Dandy works similarly. She may adopt male clothing, say, but if she saying he could no longer
does, a touch here or there will set her truly apart: no man ever dressed endure the ennui of
buttoning and unbuttoning.
quite like George Sand. The overtall hat, the riding boots worn on the
streets of Paris, made her a sight to behold. —THE GAME OF HEARTS:
HARRIETTE WILSON'S
Remember, there must be a reference point. If your visual style is to- MEMOIRS, EDITED BY LESLEY
tally unfamiliar, people will think you at best an obvious attention-getter, at BLANCH
worst crazy. Instead, create your own fashion sense by adapting and altering
prevailing styles to make yourself an object of fascination. Do this right and
you will be wildly imitated. The Count d'Orsay, a great London dandy of This royal manner which
[the dandy] raises to the
the 1830s and 1840s, was closely watched by fashionable people; one day,
height of true royalty, the
caught in a sudden London rainstorm, he bought a paltrok, a kind of heavy, dandy has taken this from
hooded duffle coat, off the back of a Dutch sailor. The paltrok immediately women, who alone seem
naturally made for such a
became the coat to wear. Having people imitate you, of course, is a sign of
role. It is a somewhat by
your powers of seduction.
using the manner and the
The nonconformity of Dandies, however, goes far beyond appearances. method of women that
It is an attitude toward life that sets them apart; adopt that attitude and a the dandy dominates. And
this usurpation of
circle of followers will form around you.
femininity, he makes
Dandies are supremely impudent. They don't give a damn about other women themselves approve
people, and never try to please. In the court of Louis XIV, the writer La of this. . . . The dandy
has something antinatural
Bruyere noticed that courtiers who tried hard to please were invariably on
and androgynous about
the way down; nothing was more anti-seductive. As Barbey d'Aurevilly him, which is precisely how
wrote, "Dandies please women by displeasing them." he is able to endlessly
seduce.
Impudence was fundamental to the appeal of Oscar Wilde. In a Lon-
don theater one night, after the first performance of one of Wilde's plays, —JULES LEMAÎTRE,
LES CONTEMPORAINS
the ecstatic audience yelled for the author to appear onstage. Wilde made
them wait and wait, then finally emerged, smoking a cigarette and wearing
an expression of total disdain. "It may be bad manners to appear here
smoking, but it is far worse to disturb me when I am smoking," he scolded
his fans. The Count d'Orsay was equally impudent. At a London club one
night, a Rothschild who was notoriously cheap accidentally dropped a gold
coin on the floor, then bent down to look for it. The count immediately
whipped out a thousand-franc note (worth much more than the coin),
rolled it up, lit it like a candle, and got down on all fours, as if to help light
the way in the search. Only a Dandy could get away with such audacity.
The insolence of the Rake is tied up with his desire to conquer a woman;
he cares for nothing else. The insolence of the Dandy, on the other hand, is
aimed at society and its conventions. It is not a woman he cares to conquer
but a whole group, an entire social world. And since people are generally
oppressed by the obligation of always being polite and self-sacrificing, they
are delighted to spend time around a person who disdains such niceties.
Dandies are masters of the art of living. They live for pleasure, not for
work; they surround themselves with beautiful objects and eat and drink

[PAGE 78]
50 • The Art of Seduction
with the same relish they show for their clothes. This was how the great
Roman writer Petronius, author of the Satyricon, was able to seduce the
emperor Nero. Unlike the dull Seneca, the great Stoic thinker and Nero's
tutor, Petronius knew how to make every detail of life a grand aesthetic ad-
venture, from a feast to a simple conversation. This is not an attitude you
should impose on those around you—you can't make yourself a nuisance—
but if you simply seem socially confident and sure of your taste, people will
be drawn to you. The key is to make everything an aesthetic choice. Your
ability to alleviate boredom by making life an art will make your company
highly prized.
The opposite sex is a strange country we can never know, and this ex-
cites us, creates the proper sexual tension. But it is also a source of annoy-
ance and frustration. Men do not understand how women think, and vice
versa; each tries to make the other act more like a member of their own
sex. Dandies may never try to please, but in this one area they have a pleas-
ing effect: by adopting psychological traits of the opposite sex, they appeal
to our inherent narcissism. Women identified with Rudolph Valentino's
delicacy and attention to detail in courtship; men identified with Lou
Andreas-Salomé's lack of interest in commitment. In the Heian court of
eleventh-century Japan, Sei Shonagon, the writer of The Pillow Book, was
powerfully seductive for men, especially literary types. She was fiercely in-
dependent, wrote poetry with the best, and had a certain emotional dis-
tance. Men wanted more from her than just to be her friend or companion,
as if she were another man; charmed by her empathy for male psychology,
they fell in love with her. This kind of mental transvestism—the ability to
enter the spirit of the opposite sex, adapt to their way of thinking, mirror
their tastes and attitudes—can be a key element in seduction. It is a way of
mesmerizing your victim.
According to Freud, the human libido is essentially bisexual; most peo-
ple are in some way attracted to people of their own sex, but social con-
straints (varying with culture and historical period) repress these impulses.
The Dandy represents a release from such constraints. In several of Shake-
speare's plays, a young girl (back then, the female roles in the theater were
actually played by male actors) has to go into disguise and dresses up as a
boy, eliciting all kinds of sexual interest from men, who later are delighted
to find out that the boy is actually a girl. (Think, for example, of Rosalind
in As You Like It.) Entertainers such as Josephine Baker (known as the
Chocolate Dandy) and Marlene Dietrich would dress up as men in their acts,
making themselves wildly popular—among men. Meanwhile the slightly
feminized male, the pretty boy, has always been seductive to women. Valen-
tino embodied this quality. Elvis Presley had feminine features (the face, the
hips), wore frilly pink shirts and eye makeup, and attracted the attention of
women early on. The filmmaker Kenneth Anger said of Mick Jagger that it
was "a bisexual charm which constituted an important part of the attrac-
tion he had over young girls . . . and which acted upon their unconscious."
In Western culture for centuries, in fact, feminine beauty has been far more

[PAGE 79]
The Dandy • 51
fetishized than male beauty, so it is understandable that a feminine-looking
face like that of Montgomery Clift would have more seductive power than
that of John Wayne.
The Dandy figure has a place in politics as well. John F. Kennedy was a
strange mix of the masculine and feminine, virile in his toughness with the
Russians, and in his White House lawn football games, yet feminine in his
graceful and dapper appearance. This ambiguity was a large part of his ap-
peal. Disraeli was an incorrigible Dandy in dress and manner; some were
suspicious of him as a result, but his courage in not caring what people
thought of him also won him respect. And women of course adored him,
for women always adore a Dandy. They appreciated the gentleness of his
manner, his aesthetic sense, his love of clothes—in other words, his femi-
nine qualities. The mainstay of Disraeli's power was in fact a female fan:
Queen Victoria.
Do not be misled by the surface disapproval your Dandy pose may
elicit. Society may publicize its distrust of androgyny (in Christian the-
ology, Satan is often represented as androgynous), but this conceals its
fascination; what is most seductive is often what is most repressed. Learn a
playful dandyism and you will become the magnet for people's dark, unre-
alized yearnings.
The key to such power is ambiguity. In a society where the roles every-
one plays are obvious, the refusal to conform to any standard will excite in-
terest. Be both masculine and feminine, impudent and charming, subtle
and outrageous. Let other people worry about being socially acceptable;
those types are a dime a dozen, and you are after a power greater than they
can imagine.
Symbol: The
Orchid. Its shape and color oddly sug-
gest both sexes, its odor is sweet and decadent
—it is a tropical flower of evil. Delicate and highly cul-
tivated, it is prized for its rarity; it is unlike any other flower.

[PAGE 80]
52 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
The Dandy's strength, but also the Dandy's problem, is that he or she
often works through transgressive feelings relating to sex roles. Al-
though this activity is highly charged and seductive, it is also dangerous,
since it touches on a source of great anxiety and insecurity. The greater
dangers will often come from your own sex. Valentino had immense appeal
for women, but men hated him. He was constantly dogged with accusa-
tions of being perversely unmasculine, and this caused him great pain. Sa-
lomé was equally disliked by women; Nietzsche's sister, and perhaps his
closest friend, considered her an evil witch, and led a virulent campaign
against her in the press long after the philosopher's death. There is little to
be done in the face of resentment like this. Some Dandies try to fight the
image they themselves have created, but this is unwise: to prove his mas-
culinity, Valentino would engage in a boxing match, anything to prove his
masculinity. He wound up looking only desperate. Better to accept society's
occasional gibes with grace and insolence. After all, the Dandies' charm is
that they don't really care what people think of them. That is how Andy
Warhol played the game: when people tired of his antics or some scandal
erupted, instead of trying to defend himself he would simply move on to
some new image—decadent bohemian, high-society portraitist, etc.—as if
to say, with a hint of disdain, that the problem lay not with him but with
other people's attention span.
Another danger for the Dandy is the fact that insolence has its limits.
Beau Brummel prided himself on two things: his trimness of figure and his
acerbic wit. His main social patron was the Prince of Wales, who, in later
years, grew plump. One night at dinner, the prince rang for the butler, and
Brummel snidely remarked, "Do ring, Big Ben." The prince did not ap-
preciate the joke, had Brummel shown out, and never spoke to him again.
Without royal patronage, Brummel fell into poverty and madness.
Even a Dandy, then, must measure out his impudence. A true Dandy
knows the difference between a theatrically staged teasing of the powerful
and a remark that will truly hurt, offend, or insult. It is particularly impor-
tant to avoid insulting those in a position to injure you. In fact the pose
may work best for those who can afford to offend—artists, bohemians, etc.
In the work world, you will probably have to modify and tone down your
Dandy image. Be pleasantly different, an amusement, rather than a person
who challenges the group's conventions and makes others feel insecure.

[PAGE 81]
Child-
hood is the golden paradise we
are always consciously or unconsciously try-
ing to re-create. The Natural embodies the longed-
for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease,
caught up in their playful spirit, transported back to that
golden age. Naturals also make a virtue out of weakness, elicit-
ing our sympathy for their trials, making us want to protect
them and help them. As with a child, much of this is natu-
ral, but some of it is exaggerated, a conscious seductive
maneuver. Adopt the pose of the Natural to
neutralize people's natural defensiveness
and infect them with helpless
delight.

[PAGE 82]


[PAGE 83]
Psychological Traits of the Natural
Children are not as guileless as we like to imagine. They suffer from
feelings of helplessness, and sense early on the power of their natural
charm to remedy their weakness in the adult world. They learn to play a
game: if their natural innocence can persuade a parent to yield to their de-
sires in one instance, then it is something they can use strategically in an-
other instance, laying it on thick at the right moment to get their way. If Long-past ages have a
their vulnerability and weakness is so attractive, then it is something they great and often puzzling
attraction for men's
can use for effect.
imagination. Whenever
Why are we seduced by children's naturalness? First, because anything they are dissatisfied with
natural has an uncanny effect on us. Since the beginning of time, natural their present surround-
ings—and this happens
phenomena—such as lightning storms or eclipses—have instilled in human
often enough—they turn
beings an awe tinged with fear. The more civilized we become, the greater back to the past and hope
the effect such natural events have on us; the modern world surrounds us that they will now be able
to prove the truth of the
with so much that is manufactured and artificial that something sudden and
inextinguishable dream of
inexplicable fascinates us. Children also have this natural power, but be-
a golden age. They are
cause they are unthreatening and human, they are not so much awe inspir- probably still under the
ing as charming. Most people try to please, but the pleasantness of the child spell of their childhood,
which is presented to them
comes effortlessly, defying logical explanation—and what is irrational is
by their not impartial
often dangerously seductive. memory as a time of
More important, a child represents a world from which we have been uninterrupted bliss.
forever exiled. Because adult life is full of boredom and compromise, we —SIGMUND FREUD, THE
harbor an illusion of childhood as a kind of golden age, even though it can STASDARD EDITION OF THE
COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL
often be a period of great confusion and pain. It cannot be denied, how-
WORKS OF SIGMUND FREUD,
ever, that childhood had certain privileges, and as children we had a plea- VOLUME 23
surable attitude to life. Confronted with a particularly charming child, we
often feel wistful: we remember our own golden past, the qualities we have
lost and wish we had again. And in the presence of the child, we get a little When Hermes was born
on Mount Cyllene his
of that goldenness back.
mother Maia laid him in
Natural seducers are people who somehow avoided getting certain swaddling bands on a
childish traits drummed out of them by adult experience. Such people can winnowing fan, but he
grew with astonishing
be as powerfully seductive as any child, because it seems uncanny and mar-
quickness into a little boy,
velous that they have preserved such qualities. They are not literally like
and as soon as her back
children, of course; that would make them obnoxious or pitiful. Rather it was turned, slipped off and
is the spirit that they have retained. Do not imagine that this childishness is went looking for adventure.
Arrived at Pieria, where
something beyond their control. Natural seducers learn early on the value
Apollo was tending a fine
of retaining a particular quality, and the seductive power it contains; they herd of cows, he decided to
55

[PAGE 84]
56 • The Art of Seduction
steal them. But, fearing to adapt and build upon those childlike traits that they managed to preserve,
be betrayed by their tracks, exactly as the child learns to play with its natural charm. This is the key. It
he quickly made a number
is within your power to do the same, since there is lurking within all of us a
oj shoes from the bark of a
devilish child straining to be let loose. To do this successfully, you have to
fallen oak and tied them
until plaited grass to the be able to let go to a degree, since there is nothing less natural than seeming
feet of the cows, which he hesitant. Remember the spirit you once had; let it return, without self-
then drove off by night
consciousness. People are much more forgiving of those who go all the
along the road. Apollo
discovered the loss, but way, who seem uncontrollably foolish, than the halfhearted adult with a
Hermes's trick deceived childish streak. Remember who you were before you became so polite and
him, and though he went
self-effacing. To assume the role of the Natural, mentally position yourself
as far as Pylus in his
westward search, and to in any relationship as the child, the younger one.
Onchestus in his eastern, The following are the main types of the adult Natural. Keep in mind
he was forced, in the end,
that the greatest natural seducers are often a blend of more than one of
to offer a reward for the
apprehension of the thief. these qualities.
Silenus and his satyrs,
greedy of reward, spread
out in different directions to
The innocent. The primary qualities of innocence are weakness and mis-
track him down but, for a
long while, without success. understanding of the world. Innocence is weak because it is doomed to
At last, as a party of them vanish in a harsh, cruel world; the child cannot protect or hold on to its in-
passed through Arcadia,
nocence. The misunderstandings come from the child's not knowing about
they heard the muffled
sound of music such as good and evil, and seeing everything through uncorrupted eyes. The weak-
they had never heard ness of children elicits sympathy, their misunderstandings make us laugh,
before, and the nymph
and nothing is more seductive than a mixture of laughter and sympathy.
Cyllene, from the mouth of
a cave, told them that a The adult Natural is not truly innocent—it is impossible to grow up in
most gifted child had this world and retain total innocence. Yet Naturals yearn so deeply to hold
recently been born there, to
on to their innocent outlook that they manage to preserve the illusion of
whom she was acting as
innocence. They exaggerate their weakness to elicit the proper sympathy.
nurse: he had constructed
an ingenious musical toy They act like they still see the world through innocent eyes, which in an
from the shell of a tortoise adult proves doubly humorous. Much of this is conscious, but to be effec-
and some cow-gut, with
tive, adult Naturals must make it seem subtle and effortless—if they are
which he had lulled his
mother to sleep. • "And seen as trying to act innocent, it will come across as pathetic. It is better for
from whom did he get the them to communicate weakness indirectly, through looks and glances, or
cow-gut?" asked the alert
through the situations they get themselves into, rather than anything obvi-
satyrs, noticing two hides
stretched outside the cave. ous. Since this type of innocence is mostly an act, it is easily adaptable for
"Do you charge the poor your own purposes. Learn to play up any natural weaknesses or flaws.
child with theft?" asked
Cyllene. Harsh words were
exchanged. • At that
moment Apollo came up, The imp. Impish children have a fearlessness that we adults have lost. That
having discovered the is because they do not see the possible consequences of their actions—how
thief's identity by observing
some people might be offended, how they might physically hurt themselves
the suspicious behaviour of
a long-winged bird. in the process. Imps are brazen, blissfully uncaring. They infect you with
Entering the cave, he their lighthearted spirit. Such children have not yet had their natural energy
awakened Maia and told
and spirit scolded out of them by the need to be polite and civil. Secretly,
her severely that Hermes
must restore the stolen we envy them; we want to be naughty too.
cows. Maia pointed to the Adult imps are seductive because of how different they are from the rest
child, still wrapped in his
of us. Breaths of fresh air in a cautious world, they go full throttle, as if

[PAGE 85]
The Natural • 57
their impishness were uncontrollable, and thus natural. If you play the part, swaddling bands and
do not worry about offending people now and then—you are too lovable feigning sleep. "What an
absurd charge!" she cried.
and inevitably they will forgive you. Just don't apologize or look contrite,
But Apollo had already
for that would break the spell. Whatever you say or do, keep a glint in your recognized the hides. He
eye to show that you do not take anything seriously. picked up Hermes, carried
him to Olympus, and there
formally accused him of
theft, offering the hides as
The wonder. A wonder child has a special, inexplicable talent: a gift for evidence. Zeus, loth to
music, for mathematics, for chess, for sport. At work in the field in which believe that his own new-
born son was a thief
they have such prodigal skill, these children seem possessed, and their ac-
encouraged him to plead
tions effortless. If they are artists or musicians, Mozart types, their work not guilty, but Apollo
seems to spring from some inborn impulse, requiring remarkably little would not be put off and
Hermes, at last, weakened
thought. If it is a physical talent that they have, they are blessed with un-
and confessed. • "Very
usual energy, dexterity, and spontaneity. In both cases they seem talented
well, come with me," he
beyond their years. This fascinates us. said, "and you may have
Adult wonders are often former wonder children who have managed, your herd. I slaughtered
only two, and those I cut
remarkably, to retain their youthful impulsiveness and improvisational skills.
up into twelve equal
True spontaneity is a delightful rarity, for everything in life conspires to rob portions as a sacrifice to the
us of it—we have to learn to act carefully and deliberately, to think about twelve gods" • "Twelve
gods?" asked Apollo.
how we look in other people's eyes. To play the wonder you need some
"Who is the twelfth?" •
skill that seems easy and natural, along with the ability to improvise. If in "Your servant, sir" replied
fact your skill takes practice, you must hide this and learn to make your Hermes modestly. "I ate
no more than my share,
work appear effortless. The more you hide the sweat behind what you do,
though I was very hungry,
the more natural and seductive it will appear. and duly burned the rest. "
• The two gods [ Hermes
and Apollo] returned to
Mount Cyllene, where
The undefensive lover. As people get older, they protect themselves against
Hermes greeted his mother
painful experiences by closing themselves off. The price for this is that they and retrieved something
grow rigid, physically and mentally. But children are by nature unprotected that he had hidden
underneath a sheepskin. •
and open to experience, and this receptiveness is extremely attractive. In
"What have you there?"
the presence of children we become less rigid, infected with their open- asked Apollo. • In answer,
ness. That is why we want to be around them. Hermes showed his newly-
invented tortoise-shell lyre,
Undefensive lovers have somehow circumvented the self-protective
and played such a
process, retaining the playful, receptive spirit of the child. They often ravishing tune on it with
manifest this spirit physically: they are graceful, and seem to age less rapidly the plectrum he had also
invented, at the same time
than other people. Of all the Natural's character qualities, this one is the
singing in praise of
most useful. Defensiveness is deadly in seduction; act defensive and you'll
Apollo's nobility,
bring out defensiveness in other people. The undefensive lover, on the intelligence, and generosity,
other hand, lowers the inhibitions of his or her target, a critical part of se- that he was forgiven at
once. He led the surprised
duction. It is important to learn to not react defensively: bend instead of
and delighted Apollo to
resist, be open to influence from others, and they will more easily fall under Pylus, playing all the way,
your spell. and there gave him the
remainder of the cattle,
which he had hidden in a
cave. • "A bargain!" cried
Apollo. "You keep the
cows, and I take the lyre. "

[PAGE 86]
58 • The Art of Seduction
Examples of Natural Seducers
• "Agreed," said Hermes,
and they shook hands on
it. • . . . Apollo, taking 1. As a child growing up in England, Charlie Chaplin spent years in dire
the child back to Olympus,
poverty, particularly after his mother was committed to an asylum. In his
told Zeus all that had
happened. Zeus warned early teens, forced to work to live, he landed a job in vaudeville, eventually
Hermes that henceforth he gaining some success as a comedian. But Chaplin was wildly ambitious, and
must respect the rights oj
so, in 1910, when he was only nineteen, he emigrated to the United States,
property and refrain from
telling downright lies; but hoping to break into the film business. Making his way to Hollywood, he
he could not help being found occasional bit parts, but success seemed elusive: the competition was
amused. "You seem to be a
fierce, and although Chaplin had a repertoire of gags that he had learned in
very ingenious, eloquent,
and persuasive godling," he vaudeville, he did not particularly excel at physical humor, a critical part of
said. • "Then make me silent comedy. He was not a gymnast like Buster Keaton.
your herald, Father,"
In 1914, Chaplin managed to get the lead in a film short called Making
Hermes answered, "and I
a Living. His role was that of a con artist. In playing around with the cos-
will he responsible for the
safety of all divine tume for the part, he put on a pair of pants several sizes too large, then
property, and never tell lies, added a derby hat, enormous boots that he wore on the wrong feet, a walk-
though I cannot promise
ing cane, and a pasted-on mustache. With the clothes, a whole new charac-
always to tell the whole
truth." • "That would not ter seemed to come to life—first the silly walk, then the twirling of the
be expected of you," said cane, then all sorts of gags. Mack Sennett, the head of the studio, did not
Zeus with a smile. . . .
find Making a Living very funny, and doubted whether Chaplin had a future
Zeus gave him a herald's
staff with white ribbons, in the movies, but a few critics felt otherwise. A review in a trade magazine
which everyone was ordered read, "The clever player who takes the role of a nervy and very nifty
to respect; a round hat
sharper in this picture is a comedian of the first water, who acts like one of
against the rain, and
Nature's own naturals." And audiences also responded—the film made
winged golden sandals
which carried him about money.
with the swiftness of the What seemed to touch a nerve in Making a Living, setting Chaplin apart
wind.
from the horde of other comedians working in silent film, was the almost
—ROBERT GRAVES,
pathetic naiveté of the character he played. Sensing he was onto something,
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOLUME I
Chaplin shaped the role further in subsequent movies, rendering him more
and more naive. The key was to make the character seem to see the world
through the eyes of a child. In The Bank, he is the bank janitor who day-
A man may meet a woman
and be shocked by her dreams of great deeds while robbers are at work in the building; in The
ugliness. Soon, if she is Pawnbroker, he is an unprepared shop assistant who wreaks havoc on a
natural and unaffected, her
grandfather clock; in Shoulder Arms, he is a soldier in the bloody trenches of
expression makes him
World War I, reacting to the horrors of war like an innocent child. Chaplin
overlook the fault of her
features. He begins to find made sure to cast actors in his films who were physically larger than he was,
her charming, it enters his subliminally positioning them as adult bullies and himself as the helpless in-
head that she might be
fant. And as he went deeper into his character, something strange hap-
loved, and a week later he
is living in hope. The pened: the character and the real-life man began to merge. Although he
following week he has been had had a troubled childhood, he was obsessed with it. (For his film Easy
snubbed into despair, and
Street he built a set in Hollywood that duplicated the London streets he had
the week afterwards he has
gone mad. known as a boy.) He mistrusted the adult world, preferring the company of
the young, or the young at heart: three of his four wives were teenagers
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND when he married them.
SUZANNE SALE More than any other comedian, Chaplin aroused a mix of laughter and
sentiment. He made you empathize with him as the victim, feel sorry for

[PAGE 87]
The Natural • 59
him the way you would for a lost dog. You both laughed and cried. And "Geographical" escapism
audiences sensed that the role Chaplin played came from somewhere deep has been rendered
ineffective by the spread of
inside—that he was sincere, that he was actually playing himself. Within
air routes. What remains is
a few years after Making a Living, Chaplin was the most famous actor "evolutionary" escapism—
in the world. There were Chaplin dolls, comic books, toys; popular songs a downward course in one's
development, back to the
and short stories were written about him; he became a universal icon. In
ideas and emotions of
1921, when he returned to London for the first time since he had left it, he
"golden childhood," which
was greeted by enormous crowds, as if at the triumphant return of a great may well be defined as
general. "regress towards
infantilism," escape to a
personal world of childish
The greatest seducers, those who seduce mass audiences, nations, the ideas. • In a strictly-
world, have a way of playing on people's unconscious, making them react regulated society, where life
follows strictly-defined
in a way they can neither understand nor control. Chaplin inadvertently hit
canons, the urge to escape
on this power when he discovered the effect he could have on audiences by from the chain of things
playing up his weakness, by suggesting that he had a child's mind in an adult "established once and for
all" must be felt
body. In the early twentieth century, the world was radically and rapidly
particularly strongly. . . . •
changing. People were working longer and longer hours at increasingly And the most perfect of
mechanical jobs; life was becoming steadily more inhuman and heartless, as them [comedians] does this
the ravages of World War I made clear. Caught in the midst of revolution- with utmost perfection, for
he [Chaplin] serves this
ary change, people yearned for a lost childhood that they imagined as a
principle . . . through the
golden paradise. subtlety of his method
An adult child like Chaplin has immense seductive power, for he offers which, offering the
spectactor an infantile
the illusion that life was once simpler and easier, and that for a moment, or
pattern to be imitated,
for as long as the movie lasts, you can win that life back. In a cruel, amoral pscyhologically infects him
world, naivete has enormous appeal. The key is to bring it off with an air with infantilism and draws
him into the "golden age"
of total seriousness, as the straight man does in stand-up comedy. More im-
of the infantile paradise of
portant, however, is the creation of sympathy. Overt strength and power is childhood.
rarely seductive—it makes us afraid, or envious. The royal road to seduction
—SERGEI EISENSTEIN, "CHARLIE
is to play up your vulnerability and helplessness. You cannot make this ob- THE KID," FROM NOTES OF A
vious; to seem to be begging for sympathy is to seem needy, which is en- FILM DIRECTOR
tirely anti-seductive. Do not proclaim yourself a victim or underdog, but
reveal it in your manner, in your confusion. A display of "natural" weak-
ness will make you instantly lovable, both lowering people's defenses and
making them feel delightfully superior to you. Put yourself in situations
that make you seem weak, in which someone else has the advantage; they
are the bully, you are the innocent lamb. Without any effort on your part,
people will feel sympathy for you. Once people's eyes cloud over with
sentimental mist, they will not see how you are manipulating them.
2. Emma Crouch, born in 1842 in Plymouth, England, came from a re-
spectable middle-class family. Her father was a composer and music profes-
sor who dreamed of success in the world of light opera. Among his many
children, Emma was his favorite: she was a delightful child, lively and flirta-
tious, with red hair and a freckled face. Her father doted on her, and prom-
ised her a brilliant future in the theater. Unfortunately Mr. Crouch had a

[PAGE 88]
60 • The Art of Seduction
Prince Gortschakoff used dark side: he was an adventurer, a gambler, and a rake, and in 1849 he
to say that she [Cora abandoned his family and left for America. The Crouches were now in dire
Pearl] was the last word in
straits. Emma was told that her father had died in an accident and she was
luxury, and that he would
have tried to steal the sun sent off to a convent. The loss of her father affected her deeply, and as the
to satisfy one of her whims. years went by she seemed lost in the past, acting as if he still doted on her.
—GUSTAVE CLAUDIN, CORA One day in 1856, when Emma was walking home from church, a well-
PEARL CONTEMPORARY dressed gentleman invited her home for some cakes. She followed him to
his house, where he proceeded to take advantage of her. The next morning
this man, a diamond merchant, promised to set her up in a house of her
Apparently the possession of own, treat her well, and give her plenty of money. She took the money but
humor implies the
left him, determined to do what she had always wanted: never see her
possession of a number of
typical habit-systems. The family again, never depend on anyone, and lead the grand life that her fa-
first is an emotional one: the ther had promised her.
habit of playfulness. Why
With the money the diamond merchant had given her, Emma bought
should one be proud of
being playful? For a double nice clothes and rented a cheap flat. Adopting the flamboyant name of
reason. First, playfulness Cora Pearl, she began to frequent London's Argyll Rooms, a fancy gin
connotes childhood and palace where harlots and gentlemen rubbed elbows. The proprietor of the
youth. If one can be playful,
Argyll, a Mr. Bignell, took note of this newcomer to his establishment—
one still possesses something
of the vigor and the joy of she was so brazen for a young girl. At forty-five, he was much older
young life . . . • But there than she was, but he decided to be her lover and protector, lavishing her
is a deeper implication. To
with money and attention. The following year he took her to Paris, which
be playful is, in a sense, to
be free. When a person is was at the height of its Second Empire prosperity. Cora was enthralled by
playful, he momentarily Paris, and of all its sights, but what impressed her the most was the parade
disregards the binding
of rich coaches in the Bois de Boulogne. Here the fashionable came to take
necessities which compel
him, in business and morals, the air—the empress, the princesses, and, not least the grand courtesans,
in domestic and community who had the most opulent carriages of all. This was the way to lead the
life. . . . • What galls us is kind of life Cora's father had wanted for her. She promptly told Bignell that
that the binding necessities
when he went back to London, she would stay on alone.
do not permit us to shape
our world as we please. . . . Frequenting all the right places, Cora soon came to the attention of
What we most deeply wealthy French gentlemen. They would see her walking the streets in a
desire, however, is to create
bright pink dress, to complement her flaming red hair, pale face, and freck-
our world for ourselves.
Whenever we can do les. They would glimpse her riding wildly through the Bois de Boulogne,
that, even in the slightest cracking her whip left and right. They would see her in cafes surrounded
degree, we are happy. Now
by men, her witty insults making them laugh. They also heard of her
in play we create our own
world. . . . exploits—of her delight in showing her body to one and all. The elite of
Paris society began to court her, particularly the older men who had grown
—PROFESSOR H.A.
OVERSTREET, INFLUENCING tired of the cold and calculating courtesans, and who admired her girlish
HUMAN BEHAVIOR spirit. As money began to pour in from her various conquests (the Duc de
Mornay, heir to the Dutch throne; Prince Napoleon, cousin to the Em-
peror), Cora spent it on the most outrageous things—a multicolored car-
riage pulled by a team of cream-colored horses, a rose-marble bathtub with
her initials inlaid in gold. Gentlemen vied to be the one who would spoil
her the most. An Irish lover wasted his entire fortune on her, in only eight
weeks. But money could not buy Cora's loyalty; she would leave a man on
the slightest whim.
Cora Pearl's wild behavior and disdain for etiquette had all of Paris on

[PAGE 89]
The Natural • 61
edge. In 1864, she was to appear as Cupid in the Offenbach operetta Or- All was quiet again. (Genji
pheus in the Underworld. Society was dying to see what she would do to slipped the latch open and
tried the doors. They had
cause a sensation, and soon found out: she came on stage practically naked,
not been bolted. A curtain
except for expensive diamonds here and there, barely covering her. As she
had been set up just inside,
pranced on stage, the diamonds fell off, each one worth a fortune; she did and in the dim light he
not stoop to pick them up, but let them roll off into the footlights. The could make out Chinese
chests and other furniture
gentlemen in the audience, some of whom had given her those diamonds,
scattered in some disorder.
applauded her wildly. Antics like this made Cora the toast of Paris, and she He made his way through
reigned as the city's supreme courtesan for over a decade, until the Franco- to her side. She lay by
herself, a slight little figure.
Prussian War of 1870 put an end to the Second Empire.
Though vaguely annoyed
at being disturbed, she
People often mistakenly believe that what makes a person desirable and se- evidently took him for
the woman Chujo until he
ductive is physical beauty, elegance, or overt sexuality. Yet Cora Pearl was
pulled back the covers.
not dramatically beautiful; her body was boyish, and her style was garish • ... His manner was so
and tasteless. Even so, the most dashing men of Europe vied for her favors, gently persuasive that
devils and demons could
often ruining themselves in the process. It was Cora's spirit and attitude that
not have gainsaid him.
enthralled them. Spoiled by her father, she imagined that spoiling her was
• ... She was so small
natural—that all men should do the same. The consequence was that, like a that he lifted her easily. As
child, she never felt she had to try to please. It was Cora's powerful air of he passed through the doors
to his own room, he came
independence that made men want to possess her, tame her. She never pre-
upon Chujo who had been
tended to be anything more than a courtesan, so the brazenness that in a summoned earlier. He
lady would have been uncivil in her seemed natural and fun. And as with a called out in surprise.
Surprised in turn, Chujo
spoiled child, a man's relationship with her was on her terms. The moment
peered into the darkness.
he tried to change that, she lost interest. This was the secret of her astound- The perfume that came
ing success. from his robes like a cloud
of smoke told her who he
Spoiled children have an undeservedly bad reputation: while those who
was. . . . [Chujo] followed
are spoiled with material things are indeed often insufferable, those who are after, but Genji was quite
spoiled with affection know themselves to be deeply seductive. This be- unmoved by her pleas. •
"Come for her in the
comes a distinct advantage when they grow up. According to Freud (who
morning," he said, sliding
was speaking from experience, since he was his mother's darling), spoiled
the doors closed. • The
children have a confidence that stays with them all their lives. This quality lady was bathed in
radiates outward, drawing others to them, and, in a circular process, making perspiration and quite
beside herself at the
people spoil them still more. Since their spirit and natural energy were
thought of what Chujo,
never tamed by a disciplining parent, as adults they are adventurous and and the others too, would
bold, and often impish or brazen. be thinking. Genji had to
feel sorry for her. Yet the
The lesson is simple: it may be too late to be spoiled by a parent, but it
sweet words poured forth,
is never too late to make other people spoil you. It is all in your attitude. the whole gamut of pretty
People are drawn to those who expect a lot out of life, whereas they tend devices for making a
woman surrender. . . . •
to disrespect those who are fearful and undemanding. Wild independence
One may imagine that
has a provocative effect on us: it appeals to us, while also presenting us with
he found many kind
a challenge—we want to be the one to tame it, to make the spirited person promises with which to
dependent on us. Half of seduction is stirring such competitive desires. comfort her. . . .
—MURASAKI SHIKIBU,
THE TALE OF GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
3. In October of 1925, Paris society was all excited about the opening of SEIDENSTICKER
the Revue Negre. Jazz, or in fact anything that came from black America,

[PAGE 90]
62 • The Art of Seduction
was the latest fashion, and the Broadway dancers and performers who made
up the Revue Nègre were African-American. On opening night, artists
and high society packed the hall. The show was spectacular, as they ex-
pected, but nothing prepared them for the last number, performed by a
somewhat gawky long-legged woman with the prettiest face: Josephine
Baker, a twenty-year-old chorus girl from East St. Louis. She came onstage
bare-breasted, wearing a skirt of feathers over a satin bikini bottom, with
feathers around her neck and ankles. Although she performed her number,
called "Danse Sauvage," with another dancer, also clad in feathers, all eyes
were riveted on her: her whole body seemed to come alive in a way the au-
dience had never seen before, her legs moving with the litheness of a cat,
her rear end gyrating in patterns that one critic likened to a hummingbird's.
As the dance went on, she seemed possessed, feeding off the crowd's ecsta-
tic reaction. And then there was the look on her face: she was having such
fun. She radiated a joy that made her erotic dance oddly innocent, even
slightly comic.
By the following day, word had spread: a star was born. Josephine be-
came the heart of the Revue Nègre, and Paris was at her feet. Within a
year, her face was on posters everywhere; there were Josephine Baker per-
fumes, dolls, clothes; fashionable Frenchwomen were slicking their hair
back a la Baker, using a product called Bakerfix. They were even trying to
darken their skin.
Such sudden fame represented quite a change, for just a few years ear-
lier, Josephine had been a young girl growing up in East St. Louis, one of
America's worst slums. She had gone to work at the age of eight, cleaning
houses for a white woman who beat her. She had sometimes slept in a rat-
infested basement; there had never been heat in the winter. (She had taught
herself to dance in her wild fashion to help keep herself warm.) In 1919,
Josephine had run away and become a part-time vaudeville performer,
landing in New York two years later without money or connections. She
had had some success as a clowning chorus girl, providing comic relief with
her crossed eyes and screwed-up face, but she hadn't stood out. Then she
was invited to Paris. Some other black performers had declined, fearing
things might be still worse for them in France than in America, but
Josephine jumped at the chance.
Despite her success with the Revue Nègre, Josephine did not delude
herself: Parisians were notoriously fickle. She decided to turn the relation-
ship around. First, she refused to be aligned with any club, and developed a
reputation for breaking contracts at will, making it clear that she was ready
to leave in an instant. Since childhood she had been afraid of dependence
on anyone; now no one could take her for granted. This only made impre-
sarios chase her and the public appreciate her the more. Second, she was
aware that although black culture had become the vogue, what the French
had fallen in love with was a kind of caricature. If that was what it took
to be successful, so be it, but Josephine made it clear that she did not take
the caricature seriously; instead she reversed it, becoming the ultimate

[PAGE 91]
The Natural • 63
Frenchwoman of fashion, a caricature not of blackness but of whiteness.
Everything was a role to play—the comedienne, the primitive dancer, the
ultrastylish Parisian. And everything Josephine did, she did with such a light
spirit, such a lack of pretension, that she continued to seduce the jaded
French for years. Her funeral, in 1975, was nationally televised, a huge cul-
tural event. She was buried with the kind of pomp normally reserved only
for heads of state.
From very early on, Josephine Baker could not stand the feeling of having
no control over the world. Yet what could she do in the face of her un-
promising circumstances? Some young girls put all their hopes on a hus-
band, but Josephine's father had left her mother soon after she was born,
and she saw marriage as something that would only make her more misera-
ble. Her solution was something children often do: confronted with a
hopeless environment, she closed herself off in a world of her own making,
oblivious to the ugliness around her. This world was filled with dancing,
clowning, dreams of great things. Let other people wail and moan; Jose-
phine would smile, remain confident and self-reliant. Almost everyone who
met her, from her earliest years to her last, commented on how seductive
this quality was. Her refusal to compromise, or to be what she was expected
to be, made everything she did seem authentic and natural.
A child loves to play, and to create a little self-contained world. When
children are absorbed in make believe, they are hopelessly charming. They
infuse their imaginings with such seriousness and feeling. Adult Naturals do
something similar, particularly if they are artists: they create their own fan-
tasy world, and live in it as if it were the real one. Fantasy is so much more
pleasant than reality, and since most people do not have the power or
courage to create such a world, they enjoy being around those who do. Re-
member: the role you were given in life is not the role you have to accept.
You can always live out a role of your own creation, a role that fits your
fantasy. Learn to play with your image, never taking it too seriously. The
key is to infuse your play with the conviction and feeling of a child, making
it seem natural. The more absorbed you seem in your own joy-filled world,
the more seductive you become. Do not go halfway: make the fantasy you
inhabit as radical and exotic as possible, and you will attract attention like a
magnet.
4. It was the Festival of the Cherry Blossom at the Heian court, in late-
tenth-century Japan. In the emperor's palace, many of the courtiers were
drunk, and others were fast asleep, but the young princess Oborozukiyo,
the emperor's sister-in-law, was awake and reciting a poem: "What can
compare with a misty moon of spring?" Her voice was smooth and deli-
cate. She moved to the door of her apartment to look at the moon. Then,
suddenly, she smelled something sweet, and a hand clutched the sleeve of
her robe. "Who are you?" she said, frightened. "There is nothing to be

[PAGE 92]
64 • The Art of Seduction
afraid of," came a man's voice, and continued with a poem of his own:
"Late in the night we enjoy a misty moon. There is nothing misty about
the bond between us." Without another word, the man pulled the princess
to him and picked her up, carrying her into a gallery outside her room,
sliding the door closed behind him. She was terrified, and tried to call for
help. In the darkness she heard him say, a little louder now, "It will do you
no good. I am always allowed my way. Just be quiet, if you will, please."
Now the princess recognized the voice, and the scent: it was Genji, the
young son of the late emperor's concubine, whose robes bore a distinctive
perfume. This calmed her somewhat, since the man was someone she
knew, but on the other hand she also knew of his reputation: Genji was the
court's most incorrigible seducer, a man who stopped at nothing. He was
drunk, it was near dawn, and the watchmen would soon be on their
rounds; she did not want to be discovered with him. But then she began to
make out the outlines of his face—so pretty, his look so sincere, without a
trace of malice. Then came more poems, recited in that charming voice,
the words so insinuating. The images he conjured filled her mind, and dis-
tracted her from his hands. She could not resist him.
As the light began to rise, Genji got to his feet. He said a few tender
words, they exchanged fans, and then he quickly left. The serving women
were coming through the emperor's rooms by now, and when they saw
Genji scurrying away, the perfume of his robes lingering after him, they
smiled, knowing he was up to his usual tricks; but they never imagined he
would dare approach the sister of the emperor's wife.
In the days that followed, Oborozukiyo could only think of Genji. She
knew he had other mistresses, but when she tried to put him out of her
mind, a letter from him would arrive, and she would be back to square one.
In truth, she had started the correspondence, haunted by his midnight visit.
She had to see him again. Despite the risk of discovery, and the fact that
her sister Kokiden, the emperor's wife, hated Genji, she arranged for fur-
ther trysts in her apartment. But one night an envious courtier found them
together. Word reached Kokiden, who naturally was furious. She de-
manded that Genji be banished from court and the emperor had no choice
but to agree.
Genji went far away, and things settled down. Then the emperor died
and his son took over. A kind of emptiness had come to the court: the
dozens of women whom Genji had seduced could not endure his absence,
and flooded him with letters. Even women who had never known him in-
timately would weep over any relic he had left behind—a robe, for in-
stance, in which his scent still lingered. And the young emperor missed his
jocular presence. And the princesses missed the music he had played on the
koto. And Oborozukiyo pined for his midnight visits. Finally even Kokiden
broke down, realizing that she could not resist him. So Genji was sum-
moned back to the court. And not only was he forgiven, he was given a
hero's welcome; the young emperor himself greeted the scoundrel with
tears in his eyes.

[PAGE 93]
The Natural • 65
The story of Genji's life is told in the eleventh-century novel The Tale of
Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court. The
character was most likely based on a real-life man, Fujiwara no Korechika.
Indeed another book of the period, The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, de-
scribes an encounter between the female author and Korechika, and reveals
his incredible charm and his almost hypnotic effect on women. Genji is a
Natural, an undefensive lover, a man who has a lifelong obsession with
women but whose appreciation of and affection for them makes him irre-
sistible. As he says to Oborozukiyo in the novel, "I am always allowed my
way." This self-belief is half of Genji's charm. Resistance does not make
him defensive; he retreats gracefully, reciting a little poetry, and as he leaves,
the perfume of his robes trailing behind him, his victim wonders why she
has been so afraid, and what she is missing by spurning him, and she finds a
way to let him know that the next time things will be different. Genji takes
nothing seriously or personally, and at the age of forty, an age at which
most men of the eleventh century were already looking old and worn, he
still seems like a boy. His seductive powers never leave him.
Human beings are immensely suggestible; their moods will easily spread
to the people around them. In fact seduction depends on mimesis, on the
conscious creation of a mood or feeling that is then reproduced by the
other person. But hesitation and awkwardness are also contagious, and
are deadly to seduction. If in a key moment you seem indecisive or self-
conscious, the other person will sense that you are thinking of yourself, in-
stead of being overwhelmed by his or her charms. The spell will be broken.
As an undefensive lover, though, you produce the opposite effect: your vic-
tim might be hesitant or worried, but confronted with someone so sure and
natural, he or she will be caught up in the mood. Like dancing with some-
one you lead effortlessly across the dance floor, it is a skill you can learn. It
is a matter of rooting out the fear and awkwardness that have built up in
you over the years, of becoming more graceful with your approach, less de-
fensive when others seem to resist. Often people's resistance is a way of
testing you, and if you show any awkwardness or hesitation, you not only
will fail the test, but you will risk infecting them with your doubts.
Symbol: The
Lamb. So soft and endearing. At
two days old the lamb can gambol gracefully;
within a week it is playing "Follow the Leader."
Its weakness is part of its charm. The Lamb is pure inno-
cence, so innocent we want to possess it, even devour it.

[PAGE 94]
66 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Achildish quality can be charming but it can also be irritating; the inno-
cent have no experience of the world, and their sweetness can prove
cloying. In Milan Kundera's novel The Book of Laughter and Forgetting, the
hero dreams that he is trapped on an island with a group of children. Soon
their wonderful qualities become intensely annoying to him; after a few
days of exposure to them he cannot relate to them at all. The dream turns
into a nightmare, and he longs to be back among adults, with real things to
do and talk about. Because total childishness can quickly grate, the most se-
ductive Naturals are those who, like Josephine Baker, combine adult expe-
rience and wisdom with a childlike manner. It is this mixture of qualities
that is most alluring.
Society cannot tolerate too many Naturals. Given a crowd of Cora
Pearls or Charlie Chaplins, their charm would quickly wear off. In any case
it is usually only artists, or people with abundant leisure time, who can af-
ford to go all the way. The best way to use the Natural character type is in
specific situations when a touch of innocence or impishness will help lower
your target's defenses. A con man plays dumb to make the other person
trust him and feel superior. This kind of feigned naturalness has countless
applications in daily life, where nothing is more dangerous than looking
smarter than the next person; the Natural pose is the perfect way to disguise
your cleverness. But if you are uncontrollably childish and cannot turn it
off, you run the risk of seeming pathetic, earning not sympathy but pity
and disgust.
Similarly, the seductive traits of the Natural work best in one who is
still young enough for them to seem natural. They are much harder for an
older person to pull off. Cora Pearl did not seem so charming when she
was still wearing her pink flouncy dresses in her fifties. The Duke of Buck-
ingham, who seduced everyone in the English court in the 1620s (includ-
ing the homosexual King James I himself), was wondrously childish in
looks and manner; but this became obnoxious and off-putting as he grew
older, and he eventually made enough enemies that he ended up being mur-
dered. As you age, then, your natural qualities should suggest more the
child's open spirit, less an innocence that will no longer convince anyone.

[PAGE 95]
The
ability to delay satisfaction is
the ultimate art of seduction—while
waiting, the victim is held in thrall. Coquettes
are the grand masters of this game, orchestrating a
back-and-forth movement between hope and frustration.
They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of physical
pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which,
however, proves elusive; yet this only makes their targets pursue
them the more. Coquettes seem totally self-sufficient: they do
not need you, they seem to say, and their narcissism proves devil-
ishly attractive. You want to conquer them but they hold the cards.
The strategy of the Coquette is never to offer total satisfaction.
Imitate the alternating heat and coolness of the Coquette
and you will keep the seduced at your heels.

[PAGE 96]


[PAGE 97]
The Hot and Cold Coquette
In the autumn of 1795, Paris was caught up in a strange giddiness. The
Reign of Terror that had followed the French Revolution had ended; the
sound of the guillotine was gone. The city breathed a collective sigh of re-
lief, and gave way to wild parties and endless festivals.
The young Napoleon Bonaparte, twenty-six at the time, had no inter-
est in such revelries. He had made a name for himself as a bright, audacious
general who had helped quell rebellion in the provinces, but his ambition There are indeed men who
are attached more by
was boundless and he burned with desire for new conquests. So when, in
resistance than by yielding
October of that year, the infamous thirty-three-year-old widow Josephine and who unwittingly prefer
de Beauharnais visited his offices, he couldn't help but be confused. Jose- a variable sky, now
splendid, now black and
phine was so exotic, and everything about her was languorous and sensual.
vexed by lightnings, to
(She capitalized on her foreignness—she came from the island of Mar- love's unclouded blue. Let
tinique.) On the other hand she had a reputation as a loose woman, and the us not forget that Josephine
had to deal with a
shy Napoleon believed in marriage. Even so, when Josephine invited him
conqueror and that love
to one of her weekly soirees, he found himself accepting.
resembles war. She did not
At the soiree he felt totally out of his element. All of the city's great surrender, she let herself be
writers and wits were there, as well as the few of the nobility who had conquered. Had she been
more tender, more
survived—Josephine herself was a vicomtesse, and had narrowly escaped
attentive, more loving,
the guillotine. The women were dazzling, some of them more beautiful perhaps Bonaparte would
than the hostess, but all the men congregated around Josephine, drawn by have loved her less.
her graceful presence and queenly manner. Several times she left the men —IMBERT DE SAINT-AMAND,
behind and went to Napoleon's side; nothing could have flattered his inse- QUOTED IN THE EMPRESS
JOSEPHINE: NAPOLEON'S
cure ego more than such attention.
ENCHANTRESS, PHILIP W.
He began to pay her visits. Sometimes she would ignore him, and he SERGEANT
would leave in a fit of anger. Yet the next day a passionate letter would ar-
rive from Josephine, and he would rush to see her. Soon he was spending
most of his time with her. Her occasional shows of sadness, her bouts of Coquettes know how to
please; not how to love,
anger or of tears, only deepened his attachment. In March of 1796, Napo-
which is why men love
leon married Josephine. them so much.
Two days after his wedding, Napoleon left to lead a campaign in northern
—PIERRE MARIVAUX
Italy against the Austrians. "You are the constant object of my thoughts,"
he wrote to his wife from abroad. "My imagination exhausts itself in guess-
ing what you are doing." His generals saw him distracted: he would leave
meetings early, spend hours writing letters, or stare at the miniature of
Josephine he wore around his neck. He had been driven to this state by the
unbearable distance between them and by a slight coldness he now detected
69

[PAGE 98]
70 • The Art of Seduction
An absence, the declining in her—she wrote infrequently, and her letters lacked passion; nor did she
of an invitation to dinner, join him in Italy. He had to finish his war fast, so that he could return to
an unintentional,
her side. Engaging the enemy with unusual zeal, he began to make mis-
unconscious harshness are
takes. "To live for Josephine!" he wrote to her. "I work to get near you; I
of more service than all
the cosmetics and fine kill myself to reach you." His letters became more passionate and erotic; a
clothes in the world. friend of Josephine's who saw them wrote, "The handwriting [was] almost
—MARCEL PROUST indecipherable, the spelling shaky, the style bizarre and confused .... What
a position for a woman to find herself in—being the motivating force be-
hind the triumphal march of an entire army."
There's also nightly, to the Months went by in which Napoleon begged Josephine to come to Italy
unintiated, \ A peril—not
and she made endless excuses. But finally she agreed to come, and left Paris
indeed like love or
marriage, \ But not the less for Brescia, where he was headquartered. A near encounter with the enemy
for this to he depreciated: \ along the way, however, forced her to detour to Milan. Napoleon was away
It is—I meant and mean from Brescia, in battle; when he returned to find her still absent, he blamed
not to disparage \ The
his foe General Würmser and swore revenge. For the next few months he
show of virtue even in the
vitiated— \ It adds an seemed to pursue two targets with equal energy: Wiirmser and Josephine.
outward grace unto their His wife was never where she was supposed to be: "I reach Milan, rush to
carriage— \ But to
your house, having thrown aside everything in order to clasp you in my
denounce the amphibious
sort of harlot, \ Couleur arms. You are not there!" Napoleon would turn angry and jealous, but
de rose, who's neither when he finally caught up with Josephine, the slightest of her favors melted
white nor scarlet. \ Such is
his heart. He took long rides with her in a darkened carriage, while his
your cold coquette, who
can't say say "no," \And generals fumed—meetings were missed, orders and strategies improvised.
won't say "yes," and keeps "Never," he later wrote to her, "has a woman been in such complete mas-
you on- and off-ing \ On a
tery of another's heart." And yet their time together was so short. During a
lee shore, till it begins to
campaign that lasted almost a year, Napoleon spent a mere fifteen nights
blow— \ Then sees your
heart wreck'd with an with his new bride.
inward scoffing. \ This Napoleon later heard rumors that Josephine had taken a lover while he
works a world of
was in Italy. His feelings toward her cooled, and he himself took an endless
sentimental woe, \ And
sends new Werters yearly series of mistresses. Yet Josephine was never really concerned about this
to the coffin; \ But yet is threat to her power over her husband; a few tears, some theatrics, a little
merely innocent flirtation, \
coldness on her part, and he remained her slave. In 1804, he had her
Not quite adultery, but
adulteration. crowned empress, and had she born him a son, she would have remained
empress to the end. When Napoleon lay on his deathbed, the last word he
—LORD BYRON,
THE COLD COQUETTE uttered was "Josephine."
During the French Revolution, Josephine had come within minutes of los-
There is a way to represent ing her head on the guillotine. The experience left her without illusions,
one's cause and in doing so and with two goals in mind: to live a life of pleasure, and to find the man
to treat the audience in
who could best supply it. She set her sights on Napoleon early on. He was
such a cool and
condescending manner that young, and had a brilliant future. Beneath his calm exterior, Josephine
they are bound to notice sensed, he was highly emotional and aggressive, but this did not intimidate
one is not doing it to please
her—it only revealed his insecurity and weakness. He would be easy to en-
them. The principle should
always be not to make slave. First, Josephine adapted to his moods, charmed him with her femi-
concessions to those who nine grace, warmed him with her looks and manner. He wanted to possess
don't have anything to give
her. And once she had aroused this desire, her power lay in postponing its
but who have everything to
gain from us. We can wait satisfaction, withdrawing from him, frustrating him. In fact the torture of

[PAGE 99]
The Coquette • 71
the chase gave Napoleon a masochistic pleasure. He yearned to subdue her until they are begging on
independent spirit, as if she were an enemy in battle. their knees even if it takes
a very long time.
People are inherently perverse. An easy conquest has a lower value than
a difficult one; we are only really excited by what is denied us, by what we —SIGMUND FREUD, IN A LETTER
TO A PUPIL, QUOTED IN PAUL
cannot possess in full. Your greatest power in seduction is your ability to
ROAZEN, FREUD AND HIS
turn away, to make others come after you, delaying their satisfaction. Most FOLLOWERS
people miscalculate and surrender too soon, worried that the other person
will lose interest, or that giving the other what he or she wants will grant
the giver a kind of power. The truth is the opposite: once you satisfy some-
When her time was come,
one, you no longer have the initiative, and you open yourself to the possi- that nymph most fair
bility that he or she will lose interest at the slightest whim. Remember: brought forth a child with
whom one could have
vanity is critical in love. Make your targets afraid that you may be with-
fallen in love even in his
drawing, that you may not really be interested, and you arouse their innate
cradle, and she called him
insecurity, their fear that as you have gotten to know them they have be- Narcissus. . . . Cephisus's
come less exciting to you. These insecurities are devastating. Then, once child had reached his
sixteenth year, and could
you have made them uncertain of you and of themselves, reignite their
be counted as at once boy
hope, making them feel desired again. Hot and cold, hot and cold—such and man. Many lads and
coquetry is perversely pleasurable, heightening interest and keeping the ini- many girls fell in love with
him, but his soft young
tiative on your side. Never be put off by your target's anger; it is a sure sign
body housed a pride so
of enslavement. unyielding that none of
those boys or girls dared to
touch him. One day, as he
She who would long retain her power must use her lover ill.
was driving timid deer into
—OVID his nets, he was seen by
that talkative nymph who
cannot stay silent when
The Cold Coquette another speaks, but yet has
not learned to speak first
herself. Her name is Echo,
In 1952, the writer Truman Capote, a recent success in literary and social and she always answers
back. . . . • So when she
circles, began to receive an almost daily barrage of fan mail from a young
saw Narcissus wandering
man named Andy Warhol. An illustrator for shoe designers, fashion maga- through the lonely
zines, and the like, Warhol made pretty, stylized drawings, some of which countryside, Echo fell in
love with him and followed
he sent to Capote, hoping the author would include them in one of his
secretly in his steps. The
books. Capote did not respond. One day he came home to find Warhol more closely she followed,
talking to his mother, with whom Capote lived. And Warhol began to tele- the nearer was the fire
which scorched her: just as
phone almost daily. Finally Capote put an end to all this: "He seemed one
sulphur, smeared round the
of those hopeless people that you just know nothing's ever going to happen tops of torches, is quickly
to. Just a hopeless, born loser," the writer later said. kindled when aflame is
brought near it. How often
Ten years later, Andy Warhol, aspiring artist, had his first one-man
she wished to make
show at the Stable Gallery in Manhattan. On the walls were a series of
flattering overtures to him,
silkscreened paintings based on the Campbell's soup can and the Coca-Cola to approach him with
bottle. At the opening and at the party afterward, Warhol stood to the side, tender pleas! • The boy, by
chance, had wandered
staring blankly, talking little. What a contrast he was to the older generation
away from his faithful band
of artists, the abstract expressionists—mostly hard-drinking womanizers full of comrades, and he called
of bluster and aggression, big talkers who had dominated the art scene for out: "Is there anybody
here?" Echo answered:
the previous fifteen years. And what a change from the Warhol who had
"Here!" Narcissus stood
badgered Capote, and art dealers and patrons as well. The critics were both still in astonishment,

[PAGE 100]
72 • The Art of Seduction
looking round in every baffled and intrigued by the coldness of Warhol's work; they could not fig-
direction. . . . He looked ure out how the artist felt about his subjects. What was his position? What
behind him, and when no
was he trying to say? When they asked, he would simply reply, "I just do it
one appeared, cried again:
"Why are you avoiding because I like it," or, "I love soup." The critics went wild with their inter-
me?" But all he heard pretations: "An art like Warhol's is necessarily parasitic upon the myths of
were his own words echoed
its time," one wrote; another, "The decision not to decide is a paradox that
back. Still he persisted,
deceived by what he took to is equal to an idea which expresses nothing but then gives it dimension."
be another's voice, and The show was a huge success, establishing Warhol as a leading figure in a
said, "Come here, and let
new movement, pop art.
us meet!" Echo answered:
In 1963, Warhol rented a large Manhattan loft space that he called the
"Let us meet!" Never
again would she reply more Factory, and that soon became the hub of a large entourage—hangers-on,
willingly to any sound. To actors, aspiring artists. Here, particularly at night, Warhol would simply
make good her words she
wander about, or stand in a corner. People would gather around him, fight
came out of the wood and
made to throw her arms for his attention, throw questions at him, and he would answer, in his non-
round the neck she loved: committal way. But no one could get close to him, physically or mentally;
but he fled from her, crying
he would not allow it. At the same time, if he walked by you without giv-
as he did so, "Away with
these embraces! I would die ing you his usual "Oh, hi," you were devastated. He hadn't noticed you;
before I would have you perhaps you were on the way out.
touch me!" . . . Thus
Increasingly interested in filmmaking, Warhol cast his friends in his
scorned, she concealed
movies. In effect he was offering them a kind of instant celebrity (their
herself in the woods, hiding
her shamed face in the "fifteen minutes of fame"—the phrase is Warhol's). Soon people were
shelter of the leaves, and competing for roles. He groomed women in particular for stardom: Edie
ever since that day she
Sedgwick, Viva, Nico. Just being around him offered a kind of celebrity by
dwells in lonely caves. Yet
still her love remained association. The Factory became the place to be seen, and stars like Judy
firmly rooted in her heart, Garland and Tennessee Williams would go to parties there, rubbing elbows
and was increased by the
with Sedgwick, Viva, and the bohemian lower echelons whom Warhol had
pain of having been
rejected. . . . • Narcissus befriended. People began sending limos to bring him to parties of their
had played with her own; his presence alone was enough to turn a social evening into a scene—
affections, treating her as he
even though he would pass through in near silence, keeping to himself and
had previously treated other
leaving early.
spirits of the waters and
the woods, and his male In 1967, Warhol was asked to lecture at various colleges. He hated to
admirers too. Then one of talk, particularly about his own art; "The less something has to say," he felt,
those he had scorned raised
"the more perfect it is." But the money was good and Warhol always found
up his hands to heaven
and prayed: "May he it hard to say no. His solution was simple: he asked an actor, Allen
himself fall in love with Midgette, to impersonate him. Midgette was dark-haired, tan, part Chero-
another, as we have done
kee Indian. He did not resemble Warhol in the least. But Warhol and
with him! May he too be
unable to gain his loved friends covered his face with powder, sprayed his brown hair silver, gave
one!" Nemesis heard and him dark glasses, and dressed him in Warhol's clothes. Since Midgette knew
granted his righteous
nothing about art, his answers to students' questions tended to be as short
prayer. ...• Narcissus,
wearied with hunting in and enigmatic as Warhol's own. The impersonation worked. Warhol may
the heat of the day, lay have been an icon, but no one really knew him, and since he often wore
down here [by a clear dark glasses, even his face was unfamiliar in any detail. The lecture audi-
pool]: for he was attracted
ences were far enough away to be teased by the thought of his presence,
by the beauty of the place,
and by the spring. While and no one got close enough to catch the deception. He remained elusive.
he sought to quench his
* * *
thirst, another thirst grew

[PAGE 101]
The Coquette • 73
Early on in life, Andy Warhol was plagued by conflicting emotions: he des- in him, and as he drank,
perately wanted fame, but he was naturally passive and shy "I've always had he was enchanted by the
beautiful reflection that he
a conflict," he later said, "because I'm shy and yet I like to take up a lot of
saw. He fell in love with
personal space. Mom always said, 'Don't be pushy, but let everyone know an insubstantial hope,
you're around.' " At first Warhol tried to make himself more aggressive, mistaking a mere shadow
for a real body. Spellbound
straining to please and court. It didn't work. After ten futile years he
by his own self, he
stopped trying and gave in to his own passivity—only to discover the power
remained there motionless,
that withdrawal commands. with fixed gaze, like a
Warhol began this process in his artwork, which changed dramatically statue carved from Parian
marble. . . . Unwittingly,
in the early 1960s. His new paintings of soup cans, green stamps, and other
he desired himself, and was
widely known images did not assault you with meaning; in fact their mean- himself the object of his
ing was totally elusive, which only heightened their fascination. They drew own approval, at once
seeking and sought, himself
you in by their immediacy, their visual power, their coldness. Having trans-
kindling the flame with
formed his art, Warhol also transformed himself: like his paintings, he be- which he burned. How
came pure surface. He trained himself to hold himself back, to stop talking. often did he vainly kiss the
treacherous pool, how often
The world is full of people who try, people who impose themselves ag-
plunge his arms deep in the
gressively. They may gain temporary victories, but the longer they are waters, as he tried to clasp
around, the more people want to confound them. They leave no space the neck he saw! But he
around themselves, and without space there can be no seduction. Cold Co- could not lay hold upon
himself. He did not know
quettes create space by remaining elusive and making others pursue them.
what he was looking at,
Their coolness suggests a comfortable confidence that is exciting to be but was fired by the sight,
around, even though it may not actually exist; their silence makes you want and excited by the very
illusion that deceived his
to talk. Their self-containment, their appearance of having no need for
eyes. Poor foolish boy, why
other people, only makes us want to do things for them, hungry for the vainly grasp at the fleeting
slightest sign of recognition and favor. Cold Coquettes may be maddening image that eludes you?
The thing you are seeking
to deal with—never committing but never saying no, never allowing close-
does not exist: only turn
ness—but more often than not we find ourselves coming back to them, ad- aside and you will lose
dicted to the coldness they project. Remember: seduction is a process of what you love. What you
see is but the shadow cast
drawing people in, making them want to pursue and possess you. Seem dis-
by your reflection; in itself
tant and people will go mad to win your favor. Humans, like nature, hate a
it is nothing. It comes with
vacuum, and emotional distance and silence make them strain to fill up the you, and lasts while you
empty space with words and heat of their own. Like Warhol, stand back are there; it will go when
you go, if go you can. . . .
and let them fight over you.
• He laid down his weary
head on the green grass,
[Narcissistic] women have the greatest fascination for and death closed the eyes
which so admired their
men. . . . The charm of a child lies to a great extent in his
owner's beauty. Even then,
narcissism, his self-sufficiency and inaccessibility, just as
when he was received into
does the charm of certain animals which seem not to con- the abode of the dead, he
cern themselves about us, such as cats. . . . It is as if we kept looking at himself in
envied them their power of retaining a blissful state of the waters of the Styx. His
sisters, the nymphs of the
mind—an unassailable libido-position which we ourselves
spring, mourned for him,
have since abandoned. and cut off their hair in
tribute to their brother. The
—SIGMUND FREUD wood nymphs mourned
him too, and Echo sang her
refrain to their lament. •
The pyre, the tossing

[PAGE 102]
74 • The Art of Seduction
Keys to the Character
torches, and the bier, were
now being prepared, but
his body was nowhere to be According to the popular concept, Coquettes are consummate teases,
found. Instead of his
corpse, they discovered a experts at arousing desire through a provocative appearance or an al-
flower with a circle of white luring attitude. But the real essence of Coquettes is in fact their ability to
petals round a yellow trap people emotionally, and to keep their victims in their clutches long af-
centre.
ter that first titillation of desire. This is the skill that puts them in the ranks
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES, of the most effective seducers. Their success may seem somewhat odd,
TRANSLATED BY
MARY M. INNES since they are essentially cold and distant creatures; should you ever get to
know one well, you will sense his or her inner core of detachment and self-
love. It may seem logical that once you become aware of this quality you
Selfishness is one of the will see through the Coquette's manipulations and lose interest, but more
qualities apt to inspire love. often we see the opposite. After years of Josephine's coquettish games,
—NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE Napoleon was well aware of how manipulative she was. Yet this conqueror
of kingdoms, this skeptic and cynic, could not leave her.
To understand the peculiar power of the Coquette, you must first
The Socrates whom you understand a critical property of love and desire: the more obviously you
see has a tendency to fall in pursue a person, the more likely you are to chase them away. Too much at-
love with good-looking
tention can be interesting for a while, but it soon grows cloying and finally
young men, and is always
in their society and in an becomes claustrophobic and frightening. It signals weakness and neediness,
ecstasy about them...but an unseductive combination. How often we make this mistake, thinking
once you see beneath the
our persistent presence will reassure. But Coquettes have an inherent un-
surface you will discover a
degree of self-control of derstanding of this particular dynamic. Masters of selective withdrawal,
which you can hardly form they hint at coldness, absenting themselves at times to keep their victim off
a notion, gentlemen. . . .
balance, surprised, intrigued. Their withdrawals make them mysterious,
He spends his whole life
and we build them up in our imaginations. (Familiarity, on the other hand,
pretending and playing
with people, and I doubt undermines what we have built.) A bout of distance engages the emotions
whether anyone has ever further; instead of making us angry, it makes us insecure. Perhaps they
seen the treasures which are
don't really like us, perhaps we have lost their interest. Once our vanity is at
revealed when he grows
serious and exposes what stake, we succumb to the Coquette just to prove we are still desirable. Re-
he keeps inside. • member: the essence of the Coquette lies not in the tease and temptation
. . . Believing that he was
but in the subsequent step back, the emotional withdrawal. That is the key
serious in his admiration of
my charms, I supposed that to enslaving desire.
a wonderful piece of good To adopt the power of the Coquette, you must understand one other
luck had befallen me; I
quality: narcissism. Sigmund Freud characterized the "narcissistic woman"
should now be able, in
return for my favours, to (most often obsessed with her appearance) as the type with the greatest ef-
find out all that Socrates fect on men. As children, he explains, we pass through a narcissistic phase
knew; for you must know
that is immensely pleasurable. Happily self-contained and self-involved, we
that there was no limit to
have little psychic need of other people. Then, slowly, we are socialized and
the pride that I felt in my
good looks. With this end taught to pay attention to others—but we secretly yearn for those blissful
in view I sent away my early days. The narcissistic woman reminds a man of that period, and makes
attendant, whom hitherto I
him envious. Perhaps contact with her will restore that feeling of self-
had always kept with me
in my encounters with involvement.
Socrates, and left myself A man is also challenged by the female Coquette's independence—he
alone with him. I must tell
wants to be the one to make her dependent, to burst her bubble. It is far
you the whole truth; attend
carefully, and do you, more likely, though, that he will end up becoming her slave, giving her in-

[PAGE 103]
The Coquette • 75
cessant attention to gain her love, and failing. For the narcissistic woman is Socrates, pull me up if
not emotionally needy; she is self-sufficient. And this is surprisingly seduc- anything I say is false. I
allowed myself to be alone
tive. Self-esteem is critical in seduction. (Your attitude toward yourself is
with him, I say,
read by the other person in subtle and unconscious ways.) Low self-esteem
gentlemen, and I naturally
repels, confidence and self-sufficiency attract. The less you seem to need supposed that he would
other people, the more likely others will be drawn to you. Understand the embark on conversation of
the type that a lover
importance of this in all relationships and you will find your neediness
usually addresses to his
easier to suppress. But do not confuse self-absorption with seductive narcis- darling when they are
sism. Talking endlessly about yourself is eminently anti-seductive, revealing tête-à-tête, and I was
glad. Nothing of the kind;
not self-sufficiency but insecurity.
he spent the day with me
The Coquette is traditionally thought of as female, and certainly the in the sort of talk which is
strategy was for centuries one of the few weapons women had to engage habitual with him, and
then left me and went
and enslave a man's desire. One ploy of the Coquette is the withdrawal of
away. Next I invited him
sexual favors, and we see women using this trick throughout history: the to train with me in the
great seventeenth-century French courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos was desired gymnasium, and I
accompanied him there,
by all the preeminent men of France, but only attained real power when
believing that I should
she made it clear that she would no longer sleep with a man as part of her
succeed with him now. He
duty. This drove her admirers to despair, which she knew how to make took exercise and wrestled
worse by favoring a man temporarily, granting him access to her body for a with me frequently, with
no one else present, but I
few months, then returning him to the pack of the unsatisfied. Queen
need hardly say that I was
Elizabeth I of England took coquettishness to the extreme, deliberately no nearer my goal. Finding
arousing the desires of her courtiers but sleeping with none of them. that this was no good
either, I resolved to make a
Long a tool of social power for women, coquettishness was slowly adapted
direct assault on him, and
by men, particularly the great seducers of the seventeenth and eighteenth not to give up what I had
centuries who envied the power of such women. One seventeenth-century once undertaken; I felt that
I must get to the bottom of
seducer, the Duc de Lauzun, was a master at exciting a woman, then sud-
the matter. So I invited
denly acting aloof. Women went wild over him. Today, coquetry is gender- him to dine with me,
less. In a world that discourages direct confrontation, teasing, coldness, and behaving just like a lover
who has designs upon his
selective aloofness are a form of indirect power that brilliantly disguises its
favourite. He was in no
own aggression.
hurry to accept this
The Coquette must first and foremost be able to excite the target of his invitation, but at last he
agreed to come. The first
or her attention. The attraction can be sexual, the lure of celebrity, what-
time he came he rose to go
ever it takes. At the same time, the Coquette sends contrary signals that
away immediately after
stimulate contrary responses, plunging the victim into confusion. The dinner, and on that occasion
eponymous heroine of Marivaux's eighteenth-century French novel Mari- I was ashamed and let him
go. But I returned to the
anne is the consummate Coquette. Going to church, she dresses tastefully,
attack, and this time I kept
but leaves her hair slightly uncombed. In the middle of the service she him in conversation after
seems to notice this error and starts to fix it, revealing her bare arm as she dinner far into the night,
and then, when he wanted
does so; such things were not to be seen in an eighteenth-century church,
to be going, I compelled
and all male eyes fix on her for that moment. The tension is much more him to stay, on the plea
powerful than if she were outside, or were tartily dressed. Remember: ob- that it was too late for him
to go. • So he betook
vious flirting will reveal your intentions too clearly. Better to be ambiguous
himself to rest, using as a
and even contradictory, frustrating at the same time that you stimulate.
bed the couch on which he
The great spiritual leader Jiddu Krishnamurti was an unconscious co- had reclined at dinner, next
to mine, and there was
quette. Revered by theosophists as their "World Teacher," Krishnamurti was
nobody sleeping in the
also a dandy. He loved elegant clothing and was devilishly handsome. At the

[PAGE 104]
76 • The Art of Seduction
room but ourselves. • . . . I same time, he practiced celibacy, and had a horror of being touched. In
swear by all the gods in
1929 he shocked theosophists around the world by proclaiming that he was
heaven that for anything
not a god or even a guru, and did not want any followers. This only height-
that had happened between
us when I got up after ened his appeal: women fell in love with him in great numbers, and his ad-
sleeping with Socrates, I visers grew even more devoted. Physically and psychologically, Krishnamurti
might have been sleeping
was sending contrary signals. While preaching a generalized love and accep-
with my father or elder
brother. • What do you tance, in his personal life he pushed people away His attractiveness and his
suppose to have been my obsession with his appearance might have gained him attention but by
state of mind after that?
themselves would not have made women fall in love with him; his lessons of
On the one hand I
realized that I had been celibacy and spiritual virtue would have created disciples but not physical
slighted, but on the other I love. The combination of these traits, however, both drew people in and
felt a reverence for Socrates'
frustrated them, a coquettish dynamic that created an emotional and physical
character, his self-control
attachment to a man who shunned such things. His withdrawal from the
and courage . . . The result
was that I could neither world had the effect of only heightening the devotion of his followers.
bring myself to be angry Coquetry depends on developing a pattern to keep the other person off
with him and tear myself
balance. The strategy is extremely effective. Experiencing a pleasure once,
away from his society, nor
find a way of subduing we yearn to repeat it; so the Coquette gives us pleasure, then withdraws it.
him to my will. . . . I was The alternation of heat and cold is the most common pattern, and has sev-
utterly disconcerted, and
eral variations. The eighth-century Chinese Coquette Yang Kuei-Fei to-
wandered about in a state
of enslavement to the man tally enslaved the Emperor Ming Huang through a pattern of kindness and
the like of which has never bitterness: having charmed him with kindness, she would suddenly get an-
been known.
gry, blaming him harshly for the slightest mistake. Unable to live without
—ALCIBIADES, QUOTED IN the pleasure she gave him, the emperor would turn the court upside down
PLATO, THE SYMPOSIUM
to please her when she was angry or upset. Her tears had a similar effect:
what had he done, why was she so sad? He eventually ruined himself and
his kingdom trying to keep her happy. Tears, anger, and the production of
guilt are all the tools of the Coquette. A similar dynamic appears in a lover's
quarrel: when a couple fights, then reconciles, the joys of reconciliation
only make the attachment stronger. Sadness of any sort is also seductive,
particularly if it seems deep-rooted, even spiritual, rather than needy or
pathetic—it makes people come to you.
Coquettes are never jealous—that would undermine their image of
fundamental self-sufficiency. But they are masters at inciting jealousy: by
paying attention to a third party, creating a triangle of desire, they signal to
their victims that they may not be that interested. This triangulation is ex-
tremely seductive, in social contexts as well as erotic ones. Interested in nar-
cissistic women, Freud was a narcissist himself, and his aloofness drove his
disciples crazy. (They even had a name for it—his "god complex.") Behav-
ing like a kind of messiah, too lofty for petty emotions, Freud always main-
tained a distance between himself and his students, hardly ever inviting
them over for dinner, say, and keeping his private life shrouded in mystery.
Yet he would occasionally choose an acolyte to confide in—Carl Jung,
Otto Rank, Lou Andreas-Salomé. The result was that his disciples went
berserk trying to win his favor, to be the one he chose. Their jealousy
when he suddenly favored one of them only increased his power over
them. People's natural insecurities are heightened in group settings; by

[PAGE 105]
The Coquette • 77
maintaining aloofness, Coquettes start a competition to win their favor. If
the ability to use third parties to make targets jealous is a critical seductive
skill, Sigmund Freud was a grand Coquette.
All of the tactics of the Coquette have been adapted by political leaders
to make the public fall in love. While exciting the masses, these leaders re-
main inwardly detached, which keeps them in control. The political scientist
Roberto Michels has even referred to such politicians as Cold Coquettes.
Napoleon played the Coquette with the French: after the grand successes of
the Italian campaign had made him a beloved hero, he left France to con-
quer Egypt, knowing that in his absence the government would fall apart,
the people would hunger for his return, and their love would serve as the
base for an expansion of his power. After exciting the masses with a rousing
speech, Mao Zedong would disappear from sight for days on end, making
himself an object of cultish worship. And no one was more of a Coquette
than Yugoslav leader Josef Tito, who alternated between distance from and
emotional identification with his people. All of these political leaders were
confirmed narcissists. In times of trouble, when people feel insecure, the ef-
fect of such political coquetry is even more powerful. It is important to real-
ize that coquetry is extremely effective on a group, stimulating jealousy, love,
and intense devotion. If you play such a role with a group, remember to
keep an emotional and physical distance. This will allow you to cry and
laugh on command, project self-sufficiency, and with such detachment you
will be able play people's emotions like a piano.
Symbol: The
Shadow. It cannot be grasped. Chase
your shadow and it will flee; turn your back on
it and it will follow you. It is also a person's dark side,
the thing that makes them mysterious. After they have given
us pleasure, the shadow of their withdrawal makes us yearn
for their return, much as clouds make us yearn for the sun.

[PAGE 106]
78 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Coquettes face an obvious danger: they play with volatile emotions.
Every time the pendulum swings, love shifts to hate. So they must or-
chestrate everything carefully. Their absences cannot be too long, their
bouts of anger must be quickly followed by smiles. Coquettes can keep
their victims emotionally entrapped for a long time, but over months or
years the dynamic can begin to prove tiresome. Jiang Qing, later known as
Madame Mao, used coquettish skills to capture the heart of Mao Tse-tung,
but after ten years the quarreling, the tears and the coolness became in-
tensely irritating, and once irritation proved stronger than love, Mao was
able to detach. Josephine, a more brilliant Coquette, was able to adapt, by
spending a whole year without playing coy or withdrawing from Napoleon.
Timing is everything. On the other hand, though, the Coquette stirs up
powerful emotions, and breakups often prove temporary. The Coquette is
addictive: after the failure of the social plan Mao called the Great Leap For-
ward, Madame Mao was able to reestablish her power over her devastated
husband.
The Cold Coquette can stimulate a particularly deep hatred. Valerie
Solanas was a young woman who fell under Andy Warhol's spell. She had
written a play that amused him, and she was given the impression he might
turn it into a film. She imagined becoming a celebrity. She also got in-
volved in the feminist movement, and when, in June 1968, it dawned on
her that Warhol was toying with her, she directed her growing rage at men
on him and shot him three times, nearly killing him. Cold Coquettes may
stimulate feelings that are not so much erotic as intellectual, less passion and
more fascination. The hatred they can stir up is all the more insidious and
dangerous, for it may not be counterbalanced by a deep love. They must
realize the limits of the game, and the disturbing effects they can have on
less stable people.

[PAGE 107]
Charm is seduction without sex. Charmers are consummate manipulators,
masking their cleverness by creating a mood of pleasure and comfort. Their
method is simple: they deflect attention from themselves and focus it on their
target. They understand your spirit, feel your pain, adapt to your moods.
In the presence of a Charmer you feel better about yourself. Charmers
do not argue or fight, complain, or pester—what could be more se-
ductive? By drawing you in with their indulgence they make
you dependent on them, and their power grows. Learn to
cast the Charmer's spell by aiming at people's
primary weaknesses: vanity and
self-esteem.

[PAGE 108]


[PAGE 109]
The Art of Charm
Sexuality is extremely disruptive. The insecurities and emotions it stirs
up can often cut short a relationship that would otherwise be deeper
and longer lasting. The Charmer's solution is to fulfill the aspects of
sexuality that are so alluring and addictive—the focused attention, the
boosted self-esteem, the pleasurable wooing, the understanding (real or
illusory)—but subtract the sex itself. It's not that the Charmer represses Birds are taken with pipes
or discourages sexuality; lurking beneath the surface of any attempt at that imitate their own
charm is a sexual tease, a possibility. Charm cannot exist without a hint of voices, and men with those
sayings that are most
sexual tension. It cannot be maintained, however, unless sex is kept at bay
agreeable to their own
or in the background. opinions.
The word "charm" comes from the Latin carmen, a song, but also an in-
—SAMUEL BUTLER
cantation tied to the casting of a magical spell. The Charmer implicitly
grasps this history, casting a spell by giving people something that holds
their attention, that fascinates them. And the secret to capturing people's
Go with the bough, you'll
attention, while lowering their powers of reason, is to strike at the things
bend it; \ Use brute force,
they have the least control over: their ego, their vanity, and their self-
it'll snap. \ Go with the
esteem. As Benjamin Disraeli said, "Talk to a man about himself and current: that's how to swim
he will listen for hours." The strategy can never be obvious; subtlety is the across rivers— \ Fighting
upstream's no good. \ Go
Charmer's great skill. If the target is to be kept from seeing through
easy with lions or tigers if
the Charmer's efforts, and from growing suspicious, maybe even tiring of the you aim to tame them; \
attention, a light touch is essential. The Charmer is like a beam of light that The bull gets inured to the
plough by slow degrees. . . . \
doesn't play directly on a target but throws a pleasantly diffused glow over it.
So, yield if she shows
Charm can be applied to a group as well as to an individual: a leader resistance: \ That way
can charm the public. The dynamic is similar. The following are the laws of you'll win in the end. fust
be sure to play \ The part
charm, culled from the stories of the most successful charmers in history.
she allots you. Censure the
things she censures, \
Endorse her endorsements,
echo her every word, \ Pro
Make your target the center of attention. Charmers fade into the back-
or con, and laugh whenever
ground; their targets become the subject of their interest. To be a Charmer
she laughs; remember, \ If
you have to learn to listen and observe. Let your targets talk, revealing she weeps, to weep too:
themselves in the process. As you find out more about them—their take your cue \ From her
every expression. Suppose
strengths, and more important their weaknesses—you can individualize
she's playing a board game,
your attention, appealing to their specific desires and needs, tailoring your \ Then throw the dice
flatteries to their insecurities. By adapting to their spirit and empathizing carelessly, move \ Your
pieces all wrong. . . . \
with their woes, you can make them feel bigger and better, validating their
Don't jib at a slavish task
sense of self-worth. Make them the star of the show and they will become
like holding \ Her mirror:
81

[PAGE 110]
82 • The Art of Seduction
slavish or not, such addicted to you and grow dependent on you. On a mass level, make ges-
attentions please. . . . tures of self-sacrifice (no matter how fake) to show the public that you
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE, share their pain and are working in their interest, self-interest being the
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN public form of egotism.
Disraeli was asked to Be a source of pleasure. No one wants to hear about your problems and
dinner, and came in green
troubles. Listen to your targets' complaints, but more important, distract
velvet trousers, with a
canary waistcoat, buckle them from their problems by giving them pleasure. (Do this often enough
shoes, and lace cuffs. His and they will fall under your spell.) Being lighthearted and fun is always
appearance at first proved
more charming than being serious and critical. An energetic presence is
disquieting, but on leaving
likewise more charming than lethargy, which hints at boredom, an enor-
the table the guests
remarked to each other that mous social taboo; and elegance and style will usually win out over vul-
the wittiest talker at the garity, since most people like to associate themselves with whatever they
luncheon-party was the
think elevated and cultured. In politics, provide illusion and myth rather
man in the yellow
waistcoat. Benjamin had than reality. Instead of asking people to sacrifice for the greater good, talk
made great advances in of grand moral issues. An appeal that makes people feel good will translate
social conversation since the
into votes and power.
days of Murray's dinners.
Faithful to his method, he
noted the stages: "Do not
talk too much at present;
Bring antagonism into harmony. The court is a cauldron of resentment
do not try to talk. But
whenever you speak, speak and envy, where the sourness of a single brooding Cassius can quickly turn
with self-possession. Speak into a conspiracy. The Charmer knows how to smooth out conflict. Never
in a subdued tone, and stir up antagonisms that will prove immune to your charm; in the face of
always look at the person
those who are aggressive, retreat, let them have their little victories. Yield-
whom you are addressing.
Before one can engage in ing and indulgence will charm the fight out of any potential enemies.
general conversation with Never criticize people overtly—that will make them insecure, and resistant
any effect, there is a certain
to change. Plant ideas, insinuate suggestions. Charmed by your diplomatic
acquaintance with trifling
but amusing subjects which skills, people will not notice your growing power.
must be first attained. You
will soon pick up sufficient
by listening and observing.
Never argue. In society Lull your victims into ease and comfort. Charm is like the hypnotist's
nothing must be discussed; trick with the swinging watch: the more relaxed the target, the easier it is
give only results. If any
to bend him or her to your will. The key to making your victims feel com-
person differ from you, bow
fortable is to mirror them, adapt to their moods. People are narcissists—
and turn the conversation.
In society never think; they are drawn to those most similar to themselves. Seem to share their
always be on the watch, or values and tastes, to understand their spirit, and they will fall under your
you will miss many
spell. This works particularly well if you are an outsider: showing that you
opportunities and say
many disagreeable things. share the values of your adopted group or country (you have learned their
Talk to women, talk to language, you prefer their customs, etc.) is immensely charming, since for
women as much as you
you this preference is a choice, not a question of birth. Never pester or be
can. This is the best
school. This is the way to overly persistent—these uncharming qualities will disrupt the relaxation
gain fluency, because you you need to cast your spell.
need not care what you say,
and had better not be
sensible. They, too, will
rally you on many points,

[PAGE 111]
The Charmer • 83
Show calm and self-possession in the face of adversity. Adversity and and as they are women you
setbacks actually provide the perfect setting for charm. Showing a calm, un- will not be offended.
Nothing is of so much
ruffled exterior in the face of unpleasantness puts people at ease. You seem
importance and of so
patient, as if waiting for destiny to deal you a better card—or as if you were
much use to a young man
confident you could charm the Fates themselves. Never show anger, ill entering life as to be well
temper, or vengefulness, all disruptive emotions that will make people de- criticised by women."
fensive. In the politics of large groups, welcome adversity as a chance to —ANDRÉ MAUROIS, DISRAELI,
show the charming qualities of magnanimity and poise. Let others get flus- TRANSLATED BY HAMISH MILES
tered and upset—the contrast will redound to your favor. Never whine,
never complain, never try to justify yourself.
You know what charm is:
a way of getting the answer
yes without having asked
Make yourself useful. If done subtly, your ability to enhance the lives of any clear question.
others will be devilishly seductive. Your social skills will prove important —ALBERT CAMUS
here: creating a wide network of allies will give you the power to link
people up with each other, which will make them feel that by knowing
you they can make their lives easier. This is something no one can resist. A speech that carries its
Follow-through is key: so many people will charm by promising a person audience along with it and
is applauded is often less
great things—a better job, a new contact, a big favor—but if they do not
suggestive simply because it
follow through they make enemies instead of friends. Anyone can make a
is clear that it sets out to be
promise; what sets you apart, and makes you charming, is your ability to persuasive. People talking
come through in the end, following up your promise with a definite action. together influence each
other in close proximity by
Conversely, if someone does you a favor, show your gratitude concretely.
means of the tone of voice
In a world of bluff and smoke, real action and true helpfulness are perhaps they adopt and the way
the ultimate charm. they look at each other and
not only by the kind of
language they use. We are
right to call a good
Examples of Charmers conversationalist a charmer
in the magical sense of the
word.
1. In the early 1870s, Queen Victoria of England had reached a low point
—GUSTAVE TARDE, L'OPINION
in her life. Her beloved husband, Prince Albert, had died in 1861, leaving
ET LA FOULE, QUOTED IN SERGE
her more than grief stricken. In all of her decisions she had relied on his MOSCOVICI, THE AGE OF THE
advice; she was too uneducated and inexperienced to do otherwise, or so CROWD
everyone made her feel. In fact, with Albert's death, political discussions
and policy issues had come to bore her to tears. Now Victoria gradually
withdrew from the public eye. As a result, the monarchy became less popu-
lar and therefore less powerful.
In 1874, the Conservative Party came to power, and its leader, the
seventy-year-old Benjamin Disraeli, became prime minister. The protocol
of his accession to his seat demanded that he come to the palace for a pri-
vate meeting with the queen, who was fifty-five at the time. Two more un-
likely associates could not be imagined: Disraeli, who was Jewish by birth,
had dark skin and exotic features by English standards; as a young man he
had been a dandy, his dress bordering on the flamboyant, and he had writ-
ten popular novels that were romantic or even Gothic in style. The queen,
on the other hand, was dour and stubborn, formal in manner and simple in

[PAGE 112]
84 • The Art of Seduction
Wax, a substance naturally taste. To please her, Disraeli was advised, he should curb his natural ele-
hard and brittle, can be gance; but he disregarded what everyone had told him and appeared before
made soft by the
her as a gallant prince, falling to one knee, taking her hand, and kissing it,
application of a little
saying, "I plight my troth to the kindest of mistresses." Disraeli pledged that
warmth, so that it will take
any shape you please. In his work now was to realize Victoria's dreams. He praised her qualities so
the same way, by being fulsomely that she blushed; yet strangely enough, she did not find him
polite and friendly, you can
comical or offensive, but came out of the encounter smiling. Perhaps she
make people pliable and
obliging, even though they should give this strange man a chance, she thought, and she waited to see
are apt to be crabbed and what he would do next.
malevolent. Hence
Victoria soon began receiving reports from Disraeli—on parliamentary
politeness is to human
nature what warmth is to debates, policy issues, and so forth—that were unlike anything other minis-
wax. ters had written. Addressing her as the "Faery Queen," and giving the
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER, monarchy's various enemies all kinds of villainous code names, he filled his
COUNSELS AND MAXIMS, notes with gossip. In a note about a new cabinet member, Disraeli wrote,
TRANSLATED BY T. BAILEY
"He is more than six feet four inches in stature; like St. Peter's at Rome no
SAUNDERS
one is at first aware of his dimensions. But he has the sagacity of the ele-
phant as well as its form." The minister's blithe, informal spirit bordered on
disrespect, but the queen was enchanted. She read his reports voraciously,
Never explain. Never
complain. and almost without her realizing it, her interest in politics was rekindled.
At the start of their relationship, Disraeli sent the queen all of his novels
—BENJAMIN DISRAELI
as a gift. She in return presented him with the one book she had written,
Journal of Our Life in the Highlands. From then on he would toss out in his
letters and conversations with her the phrase, "We authors." The queen
would beam with pride. She would overhear him praising her to others—
her ideas, common sense, and feminine instincts, he said, made her the
equal of Elizabeth I. He rarely disagreed with her. At meetings with other
ministers, he would suddenly turn and ask her for advice. In 1875, when
Disraeli managed to finagle the purchase of the Suez Canal from the debt-
ridden khedive of Egypt, he presented his accomplishment to the queen as
if it were a realization of her own ideas about expanding the British Em-
pire. She did not realize the cause, but her confidence was growing by leaps
and bounds.
Victoria once sent flowers to her prime minister. He later returned the
favor, sending primroses, a flower so ordinary that some recipients might
have been insulted; but his gift came with a note: "Of all the flowers, the
one that retains its beauty longest, is sweet primrose." Disraeli was envelop-
ing Victoria in a fantasy atmosphere in which everything was a metaphor,
and the simplicity of the flower of course symbolized the queen—and also
the relationship between the two leaders. Victoria fell for the bait; prim-
roses were soon her favorite flower. In fact everything Disraeli did now met
with her approval. She allowed him to sit in her presence, an unheard-
of privilege. The two began to exchange valentines every February. The
queen would ask people what Disraeli had said at a party; when he paid a
little too much attention to Empress Augusta of Germany, she grew jeal-
ous. The courtiers wondered what had happened to the stubborn, formal
woman they had known—she was acting like an infatuated girl.

[PAGE 113]
The Charmer • 85
In 1876, Disraeli steered through Parliament a bill declaring Queen
Victoria a "Queen-Empress." The queen was beside herself with joy. Out
of gratitude and certainly love, she elevated this Jewish dandy and novelist
to the peerage, making him Earl of Beaconsfield, the realization of a life-
long dream.
Disraeli knew how deceptive appearances can be: people were always judg-
ing him by his face and by his clothes, and he had learned never to do
the same to them. So he was not deceived by Queen Victoria's dour, sober
exterior. Beneath it, he sensed, was a woman who yearned for a man to
appeal to her feminine side, a woman who was affectionate, warm, even
sexual. The extent to which this side of Victoria had been repressed merely
revealed the strength of the feelings he would stir once he melted her
reserve.
Disraeli's approach was to appeal to two aspects of Victoria's personality
that other people had squashed: her confidence and her sexuality. He was a
master at flattering a person's ego. As one English princess remarked,
"When I left the dining room after sitting next to Mr. Gladstone, I thought
he was the cleverest man in England. But after sitting next to Mr. Disraeli, I
thought I was the cleverest woman in England." Disraeli worked his magic
with a delicate touch, insinuating an atmosphere of amusement and relax-
ation, particularly in relation to politics. Once the queen's guard was down,
he made that mood a little warmer, a little more suggestive, subtly sexual—
though of course without overt flirtation. Disraeli made Victoria feel desir-
able as a woman and gifted as a monarch. How could she resist? How could
she deny him anything?
Our personalities are often molded by how we are treated: if a parent or
spouse is defensive or argumentative in dealing with us, we tend to respond
the same way. Never mistake people's exterior characteristics for reality, for
the character they show on the surface may be merely a reflection of the
people with whom they have been most in contact, or a front disguising
its own opposite. A gruff exterior may hide a person dying for warmth; a
repressed, sober-looking type may actually be struggling to conceal uncon-
trollable emotions. That is the key to charm—feeding what has been
repressed or denied.
By indulging the queen, by making himself a source of pleasure, Dis-
raeli was able to soften a woman who had grown hard and cantankerous.
Indulgence is a powerful tool of seduction: it is hard to be angry or defen-
sive with someone who seems to agree with your opinions and tastes.
Charmers may appear to be weaker than their targets but in the end they
are the more powerful side because they have stolen the ability to resist.
2. In 1971, the American financier and Democratic Party power-player
Averell Harriman saw his life drawing to a close. He was seventy-nine, his
wife of many years, Marie, had just died, and with the Democrats out

[PAGE 114]
86 • The Art of Seduction
of office his political career seemed over. Feeling old and depressed, he
resigned himself to spending his last years with his grandchildren in quiet
retirement.
A few months after Marie's death, Harriman was talked into attending a
Washington party. There he met an old friend, Pamela Churchill, whom he
had known during World War II, in London, where he had been sent as a
personal envoy of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. She was twenty-one at
the time, and was the wife of Winston Churchill's son Randolph. There
had certainly been more beautiful women in the city, but none had been
more pleasant to be around: she was so attentive, listening to his problems,
befriending his daughter (they were the same age), and calming him when-
ever he saw her. Marie had remained in the States, and Randolph was in
the army, so while bombs rained on London Averell and Pamela had begun
an affair. And in the many years since the war, she had kept in touch with
him: he knew about the breakup of her marriage, and about her endless se-
ries of affairs with Europe's wealthiest playboys. Yet he had not seen her
since his return to America, and to his wife. What a strange coincidence to
run into her at this particular moment in his life.
At the party Pamela pulled Harriman out of his shell, laughing at his
jokes and getting him to talk about London in the glory days of the war.
He felt his old power returning—it was as if he were charming her. A few
days later she dropped in on him at one of his weekend homes. Harriman
was one of the wealthiest men in the world, but was no lavish spender; he
and Marie had lived a Spartan life. Pamela made no comment, but when
she invited him to her own home, he could not help but notice the bright-
ness and vibrancy of her life—flowers everywhere, beautiful linens on the
bed, wonderful meals (she seemed to know all of his favorite foods). He
had heard of her reputation as a courtesan and understood the lure of his
wealth, yet being around her was invigorating, and eight weeks after that
party, he married her.
Pamela did not stop there. She persuaded her husband to donate the art
that Marie had collected to the National Gallery. She got him to part with
some of his money—a trust fund for her son Winston, new houses, constant
redecorations. Her approach was subtle and patient; she made him somehow
feel good about giving her what she wanted. Within a few years, hardly any
traces of Marie remained in their life. Harriman spent less time with his
children and grandchildren. He seemed to be going through a second youth.
In Washington, politicians and their wives viewed Pamela with suspi-
cion. They saw through her, and were immune to her charm, or so they
thought. Yet they always came to the frequent parties she hosted, justify-
ing themselves with the thought that powerful people would be there.
Everything at these parties was calibrated to create a relaxed, intimate
atmosphere. No one felt ignored: the least important people would find
themselves talking to Pamela, opening up to that attentive look of hers. She
made them feel powerful and respected. Afterward she would send them a

[PAGE 115]
The Charmer • 87
personal note or gift, often referring to something they had mentioned in
conversation. The wives who had called her a courtesan and worse slowly
changed their minds. The men found her not only beguiling but useful—
her worldwide contacts were invaluable. She could put them in touch with
exactly the right person without them even having to ask. The Harrimans'
parties soon evolved into fundraising events for the Democratic Party. Put
at their ease, feeling elevated by the aristocratic atmosphere Pamela created
and the sense of importance she gave them, visitors would empty their wal-
lets without realizing quite why. This, of course, was exactly what all the
men in her life had done.
In 1986, Averell Harriman died. By then Pamela was powerful and
wealthy enough that she no longer needed a man. In 1993, she was named
the U.S. ambassador to France, and easily transferred her personal and social
charm into the world of political diplomacy. She was still working when
she died, in 1997.
We often recognize Charmers as such; we sense their cleverness. (Surely
Harriman must have realized that his meeting with Pamela Churchill in
1971 was no coincidence.) Nevertheless, we fall under their spell. The rea-
son is simple: the feeling that Charmers provide is so rare as to be worth the
price we pay.
The world is full of self-absorbed people. In their presence, we know that
everything in our relationship with them is directed toward themselves—
their insecurities, their neediness, their hunger for attention. That rein-
forces our own egocentric tendencies; we protectively close ourselves up. It
is a syndrome that only makes us the more helpless with Charmers. First,
they don't talk much about themselves, which heightens their mystery and
disguises their limitations. Second, they seem to be interested in us, and
their interest is so delightfully focused that we relax and open up to them.
Finally, Charmers are pleasant to be around. They have none of most peo-
ple's ugly qualities—nagging, complaining, self-assertion. They seem to
know what pleases. Theirs is a diffused warmth; union without sex. (You
may think a geisha is sexual as well as charming; her power, however, lies
not in the sexual favors she provides but in her rare self-effacing attentive-
ness.) Inevitably, we become addicted, and dependent. And dependence is
the source of the Charmer's power.
People who are physically beautiful, and who play on their beauty to
create a sexually charged presence, have little power in the end; the bloom
of youth fades, there is always someone younger and more beautiful, and
in any case people tire of beauty without social grace. But they never tire
of feeling their self-worth validated. Learn the power you can wield by
making the other person feel like the star. The key is to diffuse your sexual
presence: create a vaguer, more beguiling sense of excitement through a
generalized flirtation, a socialized sexuality that is constant, addictive, and
never totally satisfied.

[PAGE 116]
88 • The Art of Seduction
3. In December of 1936, Chiang Kai-shek, leader of the Chinese Nation-
alists, was captured by a group of his own soldiers who were angry with his
policies: instead of fighting the Japanese, who had just invaded China, he
was continuing his civil war against the Communist armies of Mao Ze-
dong. The soldiers saw no threat in Mao—Chiang had almost annhilated
the Communists. In fact, they believed he should join forces with Mao
against the common enemy—it was the only patriotic thing to do. The sol-
diers thought by capturing him they could compel Chiang to change his
mind, but he was a stubborn man. Since Chiang was the main impediment
to a unified war against the Japanese, the soldiers contemplated having him
executed, or turned over to the Communists.
As Chiang lay in prison, he could only imagine the worst. Several days
later he received a visit from Zhou Enlai—a former friend and now a lead-
ing Communist. Politely and respectfully, Zhou argued for a united front:
Communists and Nationalists against the Japanese. Chiang could not begin
to hear such talk; he hated the Communists with a passion, and became
hopelessly emotional. To sign an agreement with the Communists in these
circumstances, he yelled, would be humiliating, and would lose me all
honor among my own army. It's out of the question. Kill me if you must.
Zhou listened, smiled, said barely a word. As Chiang's rant ended he
told the Nationalist general that a concern for honor was something he
understood, but that the honorable thing for them to do was actually to
forget their differences and fight the invader. Chiang could lead both
armies. Finally, Zhou said that under no circumstances would he allow his
fellow Communists, or anyone for that matter, to execute such a great man
as Chiang Kai-shek. The Nationalist leader was stunned and moved.
The next day, Chiang was escorted out of prison by Communist
guards, transferred to one of his own army's planes, and sent back to his
own headquarters. Apparently Zhou had executed this policy on his own,
for when word of it reached the other Communist leaders, they were out-
raged: Zhou should have forced Chiang to fight the Japanese, or else should
have ordered his execution—to release him without concessions was the
height of pusillanimity, and Zhou would pay. Zhou said nothing and
waited. A few months later, Chiang signed an agreement to halt the civil
war and join with the Communists against the Japanese. He seemed to have
come to his decision on his own, and his army respected it—they could not
doubt his motives.
Working together, the Nationalists and the Communists expelled the
Japanese from China. But the Communists, whom Chiang had previously
almost destroyed, took advantage of this period of collaboration to regain
strength. Once the Japanese had left, they turned on the Nationalists, who,
in 1949, were forced to evacuate mainland China for the island of For-
mosa, now Taiwan.
Now Mao paid a visit to the Soviet Union. China was in terrible shape
and in desperate need of assistance, but Stalin was wary of the Chinese, and
lectured Mao about the many mistakes he had made. Mao argued back.

[PAGE 117]
The Charmer • 89
Stalin decided to teach the young upstart a lesson; he would give China
nothing. Tempers rose. Mao sent urgently for Zhou Enlai who arrived the
next day and went right to work.
In the long negotiating sessions, Zhou made a show of enjoying his
hosts' vodka. He never argued, and in fact agreed that the Chinese had
made many mistakes, had much to learn from the more experienced Sovi-
ets: "Comrade Stalin," he said, "we are the first large Asian country to join
the socialist camp under your guidance." Zhou had come prepared with all
kinds of neatly drawn diagrams and charts, knowing the Russians loved
such things. Stalin warmed up to him. The negotiations proceeded, and a
few days after Zhou's arrival, the two parties signed a treaty of mutual aid—
a treaty far more useful to the Chinese than to the Soviets.
In 1959, China was again in deep trouble. Mao's Great Leap Forward,
an attempt to spark an overnight industrial revolution in China, had been
a devastating failure. The people were angry: they were starving while
Beijing bureaucrats lived well. Many Beijing officials, Zhou among them,
returned to their native towns to try to bring order. Most of them managed
by bribes—by promising all kinds of favors—but Zhou proceeded differ-
ently: he visited his ancestral graveyard, where generations of his family
were buried, and ordered that the tombstones be removed and the coffins
buried deeper. Now the land could be farmed for food. In Confucian
terms (and Zhou was an obedient Confucian), this was sacrilege, but every-
one knew what it meant: Zhou was willing to suffer personally. Every-
one had to sacrifice, even the leaders. His gesture had immense symbolic
impact.
When Zhou died, in 1976, an unofficial and unorganized outpouring
of public grief caught the government by surprise. They could not under-
stand how a man who had worked behind the scenes, and had shunned the
adoration of the masses, could have won such affection.
The capture of Chiang Kai-shek was a turning point in the civil war. To
execute him might have been disastrous: it had been Chiang who had held
the Nationalist army together, and without him it could have broken up
into factions, allowing the Japanese to overrun the country. To force him to
sign an agreement would have not helped either: he would have lost face
before his army, would never have honored the agreement, and would have
done everything he could to avenge his humiliation. Zhou knew that to
execute or compel a captive will only embolden your enemy, and will have
repercussions you cannot control. Charm, on the other hand, is a manipu-
lative weapon that disguises its own manipulativeness, letting you gain a
victory without stirring the desire for revenge.
Zhou worked on Chiang perfectly, paying him respect, playing the in-
ferior, letting him pass from the fear of execution to the relief of unex-
pected release. The general was allowed to leave with his dignity intact.
Zhou knew all this would soften him up, planting the seed of the idea that
perhaps the Communists were not so bad after all, and that he could change

[PAGE 118]
90 • The Art of Seduction
his mind about them without looking weak, particularly if he did so inde-
pendently rather than while he was in prison. Zhou applied the same phi-
losophy to every situation: play the inferior, unthreatening and humble.
What will this matter if in the end you get what you want: time to recover
from a civil war, a treaty, the good will of the masses.
Time is the greatest weapon you have. Patiently keep in mind a long-
term goal and neither person nor army can resist you. And charm is the
best way of playing for time, of widening your options in any situation.
Through charm you can seduce your enemy into backing off, giving you
the psychological space to plot an effective counterstrategy. The key is to
make other people emotional while you remain detached. They may feel
grateful, happy, moved, arrogant—it doesn't matter, as long as they feel. An
emotional person is a distracted person. Give them what they want, appeal
to their self-interest, make them feel superior to you. When a baby has
grabbed a sharp knife, do not try to grab it back; instead, stay calm, offer
candy, and the baby will drop the knife to pick up the tempting morsel you
offer.
4. In 1761, Empress Elizabeth of Russia died, and her nephew ascended to
the throne as Czar Peter III. Peter had always been a little boy at heart—he
played with toy soldiers long past the appropriate age—and now, as czar, he
could finally do whatever he pleased and the world be damned. Peter con-
cluded a treaty with Frederick the Great that was highly favorable to the
foreign ruler (Peter adored Frederick, and particularly the disciplined way
his Prussian soldiers marched). This was a practical debacle, but in matters
of emotion and etiquette, Peter was even more offensive: he refused to
properly mourn his aunt the empress, resuming his war games and parties a
few days after the funeral. What a contrast he was to his wife, Catherine.
She was respectful during the funeral, was still wearing black months later,
and could be seen at all hours beside Elizabeth's tomb, praying and cry-
ing. She was not even Russian, but a German princess who had come east
to marry Peter in 1745 without speaking a word of the language. Even the
lowest peasant knew that Catherine had converted to the Russian Ortho-
dox Church, and had learned to speak Russian with incredible speed, and
beautifully. At heart, they thought, she was more Russian than all of those
fops in the court.
During these difficult months, while Peter offended almost everyone in
the country, Catherine discreetly kept a lover, Gregory Orlov, a lieutenant
in the guards. It was through Orlov that word spread of her piety, her pa-
triotism, her worthiness for rule; how much better to follow such a woman
than to serve Peter. Late into the night, Catherine and Orlov would talk,
and he would tell her the army was behind her and would urge her to stage
a coup. She would listen attentively, but would always reply that this was
not the time for such things. Orlov wondered to himself: perhaps she was
too gentle and passive for such a great step.

[PAGE 119]
The Charmer • 91
Peter's regime was repressive, and the arrests and executions piled up.
He also grew more abusive toward his wife, threatening to divorce her and
marry his mistress. One drunken evening, driven to distraction by Cather-
ine's silence and his inability to provoke her, he ordered her arrest. The
news spread fast, and Orlov hurried to warn Catherine that she would be
imprisoned or executed unless she acted fast. This time Catherine did not
argue; she put on her simplest mourning gown, left her hair half undone,
followed Orlov to a waiting carriage, and rushed to the army barracks.
Here the soldiers fell to the ground, kissing the hem of her dress—they had
heard so much about her but had never seen her in person, and she seemed
to them like a statue of the Madonna come to life. They gave her an army
uniform, marveling at how beautiful she looked in men's clothes, and set
off under Orlov's command for the Winter Palace. The procession grew as
it passed through the streets of St. Petersburg. Everyone applauded Cather-
ine, everyone felt that Peter should be dethroned. Soon priests arrived to
give Catherine their blessing, making the people even more excited. And
through it all, she was silent and dignified, as if all were in the hands of fate.
When news reached Peter of this peaceful rebellion, he grew hysterical,
and agreed to abdicate that very night. Catherine became empress without
a single battle or even a single gunshot.
As a child, Catherine was intelligent and spirited. Since her mother had
wanted a daughter who was obedient rather than dazzling, and who would
therefore make a better match, the child was subjected to a constant barrage
of criticism, against which she developed a defense: she learned to seem to
defer to other people totally as a way to neutralize their aggression. If she
was patient and did not force the issue, instead of attacking her they would
fall under her spell.
When Catherine came to Russia—at the age of sixteen, without a
friend or ally in the country—she applied the skills she had learned in
dealing with her difficult mother. In the face of all the court monsters—
the imposing Empress Elizabeth, her own infantile husband, the endless
schemers and betrayers—she curtseyed, deferred, waited, and charmed. She
had long wanted to rule as empress, and knew how hopeless her husband
was. But what good would it do to seize power violently, laying a claim that
some would certainly see as illegitimate, and then have to worry endlessly
that she would be dethroned in turn? No, the moment had to be ripe, and
she had to make the people carry her into power. It was a feminine style of
revolution: by being passive and patient, Catherine suggested that she had
no interest in power. The effect was soothing—charming.
There will always be difficult people for us to face—the chronically in-
secure, the hopelessly stubborn, the hysterical complainers. Your ability to
disarm these people will prove an invaluable skill. You do have to be care-
ful, though: if you are passive they will run all over you; if assertive you will
make their monstrous qualities worse. Seduction and charm are the most
effective counterweapons. Outwardly, be gracious. Adapt to their every

[PAGE 120]
92 • The Art of Seduction
mood. Enter their spirit. Inwardly, calculate and wait: your surrender is a
strategy, not a way of life. When the time comes, and it inevitably will, the
tables will turn. Their aggression will land them in trouble, and that will
put you in a position to rescue them, regaining superiority. (You could also
decide that you had had enough, and consign them to oblivion.) Your
charm has prevented them from foreseeing this or growing suspicious. A
whole revolution can be enacted without a single act of violence, simply by
waiting for the apple to ripen and fall.
Symbol: The
Mirror. Your spirit holds a mirror up
to others. When they see you they see them-
selves: their values, their tastes, even their flaws. Their
lifelong love affair with their own image is comfortable and
hypnotic; so feed it. No one ever sees what is behind the mirror.

[PAGE 121]
The Charmer • 93
Dangers
T
here are those who are immune to a Charmer; particularly cynics, and
confident types who do not need validation. These people tend to
view Charmers as slippery and deceitful, and they can make problems for
you. The solution is to do what most Charmers do by nature: befriend and
charm as many people as possible. Secure your power through numbers and
you will not have to worry about the few you cannot seduce. Catherine the
Great's kindness to everyone she met created a vast amount of good will
that paid off later. Also, it is sometimes charming to reveal a strategic flaw.
There is one person you dislike? Confess it openly, do not try to charm
such an enemy, and people will think you more human, less slippery. Dis-
raeli had such a scapegoat with his great nemesis, William Gladstone.
The dangers of political charm are harder to handle: your conciliatory,
shifting, flexible approach to politics will make enemies out of everyone
who is a rigid believer in a cause. Social seducers such as Bill Clinton and
Henry Kissinger could often win over the most hardened opponent with
their personal charm, but they could not be everywhere at once. Many
members of the English Parliament thought Disraeli a shifty conniver; in
person his engaging manner could dispel such feelings, but he could not
address the entire Parliament one-on-one. In difficult times, when people
yearn for something substantial and firm, the political charmer may be in
danger.
As Catherine the Great proved, timing is everything. Charmers must
know when to hibernate and when the times are ripe for their persuasive
powers. Known for their flexibility, they should sometimes be flexible
enough to act inflexibly. Zhou Enlai, the consummate chameleon, could
play the hard-core Communist when it suited him. Never become the slave
to your own powers of charm; keep it under control, something you can
turn off and on at will.

[PAGE 122]


[PAGE 123]
Charisma
is a presence that excites us. It
comes from an inner quality—self-confi-
dence, sexual energy, sense of purpose, content-
ment—that most people lack and want. This
quality radiates outward, permeating the gestures
of Charismatics, making them seem extraordinary
and superior, and making us imagine there is more
to them than meets the eye: they are gods, saints,
stars. Charismatics can learn to heighten their
charisma with a piercing gaze, fiery oratory,
an air of mystery. They can seduce on a
grand scale. Learn to create the
charismatic illusion by radiating
intensity while remain-
ing detached.

[PAGE 124]


[PAGE 125]
Charisma and Seduction
Charisma is seduction on a mass level. Charismatics make crowds of
people fall in love with them, then lead them along. The process of
making them fall in love is simple and follows a path similar to that of a
one-on-one seduction. Charismatics have certain qualities that are power-
fully attractive and that make them stand out. This could be their self-
belief, their boldness, their serenity. They keep the source of these qualities
mysterious. They do not explain where their confidence or contentment "Charisma" shall be
understood to refer to an
comes from, but it can be felt by everyone; it radiates outward, without the
extraordinary quality of a
appearance of conscious effort. The face of the Charismatic is usually ani- person, regardless of
mated, full of energy, desire, alertness—the look of a lover, one that is in- whether this quality is
actual, alleged or
stantly appealing, even vaguely sexual. We happily follow Charismatics
presumed. "Charismatic
because we like to be led, particularly by people who promise adventure or
authority," hence, shall
prosperity. We lose ourselves in their cause, become emotionally attached refer to a rule over men,
to them, feel more alive by believing in them—we fall in love. Charisma whether predominately
ex tern al or p redominately
plays on repressed sexuality, creates an erotic charge. Yet the origins of the
internal, to which the
word lie not in sexuality but in religion, and religion remains deeply em- governed submit because of
bedded in modern charisma. their belief in the
extraordinary quality of the
Thousands of years ago, people believed in gods and spirits, but few
specific person.
could ever say that they had witnessed a miracle, a physical demonstration
—MAX WEBER, FROM MAX
of divine power. A man, however, who seemed possessed by a divine
WEBER: ESSAYS IN SOCIOLOGY,
spirit—speaking in tongues, ecstatic raptures, the expression of intense EDITED BY HANS GERTH AND
C. WRIGHT MILLS
visions—would stand out as one whom the gods had singled out. And this
man, a priest or a prophet, gained great power over others. What made the
Hebrews believe in Moses, follow him out of Egypt, and remain loyal to
him despite their endless wandering in the desert? The look in his eye, his
inspired and inspiring words, the face that literally glowed when he came
down from Mount Sinai—all these things gave him the appearance of hav-
ing direct communication with God, and were the source of his authority.
And these were what was meant by "charisma," a Greek word referring to
prophets and to Christ himself. In early Christianity, charisma was a gift or
talent vouchsafed by God's grace and revealing His presence. Most of the
great religions were founded by a Charismatic, a person who physically dis-
played the signs of God's favor.
Over the years, the world became more rational. Eventually people
came to hold power not by divine right but because they won votes, or
proved their competence. The great early-twentieth-century German soci-
97

[PAGE 126]
98 • The Art of Seduction
And the Lord said to ologist Max Weber, however, noticed that despite our supposed progress,
Moses, "Write these there were more Charismatics than ever. What characterized a modern
words; in accordance with
Charismatic, according to Weber, was the appearance of an extraordinary
these words I have made a
quality in their character, the equivalent of a sign of God's favor. How else
covenant with you and
with Israel." And he was to explain the power of a Robespierre or a Lenin? More than anything it
there with the Lord forty was the force of their magnetic personalities that made these men stand out
days and forty nights; he
and was the source of their power. They did not speak of God but of a
neither ate bread nor drank
water. And he wrote upon great cause, visions of a future society. Their appeal was emotional; they
the tables the words of the seemed possessed. And their audiences reacted as euphorically as earlier au-
covenant, the ten
diences had to a prophet. When Lenin died, in 1924, a cult formed around
commandments. When
Moses came down from his memory, transforming the communist leader into a deity.
Mount Sinai, with the two Today, anyone who has presence, who attracts attention when he or she
tables of the testimony in
enters a room, is said to possess charisma. But even these less-exalted types
his hand as he came down
from the mountain, Moses reveal a trace of the quality suggested by the word's original meaning.
did not know that the skin Their charisma is mysterious and inexplicable, never obvious. They have an
of his face shone because he unusual confidence. They have a gift—often a smoothness with language—
had been talking with
that makes them stand out from the crowd. They express a vision. We may
God. And when Aaron
and all the people of Israel not realize it, but in their presence we have a kind of religious experience:
saw Moses, behold, the we believe in these people, without having any rational evidence for doing
skin of his face shone, and
so. When trying to concoct an effect of charisma, never forget the religious
they were afraid to come
near him. But Moses source of its power. You must radiate an inward quality that has a saintly or
called to them; and Aaron spiritual edge to it. Your eyes must glow with the fire of a prophet. Your
and all the leaders of the
charisma must seem natural, as if it came from something mysteriously be-
congregation returned to
him, and Moses talked yond your control, a gift of the gods. In our rational, disenchanted world,
with them. And afterward people crave a religious experience, particularly on a group level. Any sign
all the people of Israel came
of charisma plays to this desire to believe in something. And there is noth-
near, and he gave them in
ing more seductive than giving people something to believe in and follow.
commandment all that the
Lord had spoken with him Charisma must seem mystical, but that does not mean you cannot learn
in Mount Sinai. And certain tricks that will enhance the charisma you already possess, or will
when Moses had finished
give you the outward appearance of it. The following are basic qualities
speaking with them, he put
a veil on his face; but that will help create the illusion of charisma:
whenever Moses went in
before the Lord to speak
with him, he took the veil
off, until he came out; and Purpose. If people believe you have a plan, that you know where you are
when he came out, and going, they will follow you instinctively. The direction does not matter:
told the people of Israel
pick a cause, an ideal, a vision and show that you will not sway from your
what he was commanded,
goal. People will imagine that your confidence comes from something
the people of Israel saw the
face of Moses, that the skin real—just as the ancient Hebrews believed Moses was in communion with
of Moses's face shone; and God, simply because he showed the outward signs.
Moses would put the veil
Purposefulness is doubly charismatic in times of trouble. Since most
upon his face again, until
he went in to speak people hesitate before taking bold action (even when action is what is re-
with him. quired), single-minded self-assurance will make you the focus of attention.
—EXODUS 34:27 OLD People will believe in you through the simple force of your character. When
TESTAMENT Franklin Delano Roosevelt came to power amidst the Depression, much of
the public had little faith he could turn things around. But in his first few
months in office he displayed such confidence, such decisiveness and clarity

[PAGE 127]
The Charismatic • 99
in dealing with the country's many problems, that the public began to see That devil of a man
him as their savior, someone with intense charisma. exercises a fascination on
me that I cannot explain
even to myself, and in such
a degree that, though I fear
Mystery. Mystery lies at charisma's heart, but it is a particular kind of neither God nor devil,
mystery—a mystery expressed by contradiction. The Charismatic may be when I am in his presence
I am ready to tremble like
both proletarian and aristocratic (Mao Zedong), both cruel and kind (Peter
a child, and he could make
the Great), both excitable and icily detached (Charles de Gaulle), both inti- me go through the eye of a
mate and distant (Sigmund Freud). Since most people are predictable, the needle to throw myself into
the fire.
effect of these contradictions is devastatingly charismatic. They make you
hard to fathom, add richness to your character, make people talk about you. —GENERAL VANDAMME, ON
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE
It is often better to reveal your contradictions slowly and subtly—if you
throw them out one on top of the other, people may think you have an er-
ratic personality. Show your mysteriousness gradually and word will spread.
[The masses] have never
You must also keep people at arm's length, to keep them from figuring
thirsted after truth. They
you out. demand illusions, and
Another aspect of mystery is a hint of the uncanny. The appearance of cannot do without them.
They constantly give what
prophetic or psychic gifts will add to your aura. Predict things authorita-
is unreal precedence over
tively and people will often imagine that what you have said has come true. what is real; they are
almost as strongly
influenced by what is
untrue as by what is true.
Saintliness. Most of us must compromise constantly to survive; saints do They have an evident
not. They must live out their ideals without caring about the consequences. tendency not to distinguish
between the two.
The saintly effect bestows charisma.
Saintliness goes far beyond religion: politicians as disparate as George —SIGMUND FREUD, THE
STANDARD EDITION OFTHE
Washington and Lenin won saintly reputations by living simply, despite
COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL
their power—by matching their political values to their personal lives. Both WORKS OF SIGMUND FREUD,
men were virtually deified after they died. Albert Einstein too had a saintly VOLUME I8
aura—childlike, unwilling to compromise, lost in his own world. The key
is that you must already have some deeply held values; that part cannot be
faked, at least not without risking accusations of charlatanry that will de-
stroy your charisma in the long run. The next step is to show, as simply and
subtly as possible, that you live what you believe. Finally, the appearance of
being mild and unassuming can eventually turn into charisma, as long as
you seem completely comfortable with it. The source of Harry Truman's
charisma, and even of Abraham Lincoln's, was to appear to be an Everyman.
Eloquence. A Charismatic relies on the power of words. The reason is
simple: words are the quickest way to create emotional disturbance. They
can uplift, elevate, stir anger, without referring to anything real. During the
Spanish Civil War, Dolores Gómez Ibarruri, known as La Pasionaria, gave
pro-Communist speeches that were so emotionally powerful as to deter-
mine several key moments in the war. To bring off this kind of eloquence,
it helps if the speaker is as emotional, as caught up in words, as the audi-
ence is. Yet eloquence can be learned: the devices La Pasionaria used—

[PAGE 128]
100 • The Art of Seduction
catchwords, slogans, rhythmic repetitions, phrases for the audience to re-
peat—can easily be acquired. Roosevelt, a calm, patrician type, was able to
make himself a dynamic speaker, both through his style of delivery, which
was slow and hypnotic, and through his brilliant use of imagery, allitera-
tion, and biblical rhetoric. The crowds at his rallies were often moved to
tears. The slow, authoritative style is often more effective than passion in
the long run, for it is more subtly spellbinding, and less tiring.
Theatricality. A Charismatic is larger than life, has extra presence. Actors
have studied this kind of presence for centuries; they know how to stand
on a crowded stage and command attention. Surprisingly, it is not the actor
who screams the loudest or gestures the most wildly who works this magic
best, but the actor who stays calm, radiating self-assurance. The effect is
ruined by trying too hard. It is essential to be self-aware, to have the ability
to see yourself as others see you. De Gaulle understood that self-awareness
was key to his charisma; in the most turbulent circumstances—the Nazi
occupation of France, the national reconstruction after World War II,
an army rebellion in Algeria—he retained an Olympian composure that
played beautifully against the hysteria of his colleagues. When he spoke, no
one could take their eyes off him. Once you know how to command at-
tention this way, heighten the effect by appearing in ceremonial and ritual
events that are full of exciting imagery, making you look regal and godlike.
Flamboyancy has nothing to do with charisma—it attracts the wrong kind
of attention.
Uninhibitedness. Most people are repressed, and have little access to their
unconscious—a problem that creates opportunities for the Charismatic,
who can become a kind of screen on which others project their secret fan-
tasies and longings. You will first have to show that you are less inhibited
than your audience—that you radiate a dangerous sexuality, have no fear of
death, are delightfully spontaneous. Even a hint of these qualities will make
people think you more powerful than you are. In the 1850s a bohemian
American actress, Adah Isaacs Menken, took the world by storm through
her unbridled sexual energy, and her fearlessness. She would appear on
stage half-naked, performing death-defying acts; few women could dare
such things in the Victorian period, and a rather mediocre actress became a
figure of cultlike adoration.
An extension of your being uninhibited is a dreamlike quality in your
work and character that reveals your openness to your unconscious. It was
the possession of this quality that transformed artists like Wagner and Pi-
casso into charismatic idols. Its cousin is a fluidity of body and spirit; while
the repressed are rigid, Charismatics have an ease and an adaptability that
show their openness to experience.

[PAGE 129]
The Charismatic • 101
Fervency. You need to believe in something, and to believe in it strongly
enough for it to animate all your gestures and make your eyes light up. This
cannot be faked. Politicians inevitably lie to the public; what distinguishes
Charismatics is that they believe their own lies, which makes them that
much more believable. A prerequisite for fiery belief is some great cause to
rally around—a crusade. Become the rallying point for people's discontent,
and show that you share none of the doubts that plague normal humans. In
1490, the Florentine Girolamo Savonarola railed at the immorality of the
pope and the Catholic Church. Claiming to be divinely inspired, he be-
came so animated during his sermons that hysteria would sweep the crowd.
Savonarola developed such a following that he briefly took over the city,
until the pope had him captured and burned at the stake. People believed in
him because of the depth of his conviction. His example has more rele-
vance today than ever: people are more and more isolated, and long for
communal experience. Let your own fervent and contagious faith, in virtu-
ally anything, give them something to believe in.
Vulnerability. Charismatics display a need for love and affection. They are
open to their audience, and in fact feed off its energy; the audience in turn
is electrified by the Charismatic, the current increasing as it passes back and
forth. This vulnerable side to charisma softens the self-confident side,
which can seem fanatical and frightening.
Since charisma involves feelings akin to love, you in turn must reveal
your love for your followers. This was a key component to the charisma
that Marilyn Monroe radiated on camera. "I knew I belonged to the Pub-
lic," she wrote in her diary, "and to the world, not because I was talented or
even beautiful but because I had never belonged to anything or anyone else.
The Public was the only family, the only Prince Charming and the only
home I had ever dreamed of." In front of a camera, Monroe suddenly came
to life, flirting with and exciting her unseen public. If the audience does
not sense this quality in you they will turn away from you. On the other
hand, you must never seem manipulative or needy. Imagine your public as a
single person whom you are trying to seduce—nothing is more seductive
to people than the feeling that they are desired.
Adventurousness. Charismatics are unconventional. They have an air of
adventure and risk that attracts the bored. Be brazen and courageous in
your actions—be seen taking risks for the good of others. Napoleon made
sure his soldiers saw him at the cannons in battle. Lenin walked openly on
the streets, despite the death threats he had received. Charismatics thrive in
troubled waters; a crisis situation allows them to flaunt their daring, which
enhances their aura. John F. Kennedy came to life in dealing with the
Cuban missile crisis, Charles de Gaulle when he confronted rebellion in

[PAGE 130]
102 • The Art of Seduction
In such conditions, where Algeria. They needed these problems to seem charismatic, and in fact some
half the battle was hand- have even accused them of stirring up situations (Kennedy through his
to-hand, concentrated into
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, for instance) that played to their love of
a small space, the spirit
and example of the leader adventure. Show heroism to give yourself a charisma that will last you a
counted for much. When lifetime. Conversely, the slightest sign of cowardice or timidity will ruin
we remember this, it
whatever charisma you had.
becomes easier to
understand the astonishing
effect of Joan's presence
upon the French troops. Magnetism. If any physical attribute is crucial in seduction, it is the eyes.
Her position as a leader
They reveal excitement, tension, detachment, without a word being spo-
was a unique one. She was
not a professional soldier; ken. Indirect communication is critical in seduction, and also in charisma.
she was not really a soldier The demeanor of Charismatics may be poised and calm, but their eyes are
at all; she was not even a
magnetic; they have a piercing gaze that disturbs their targets' emotions,
man. She was ignorant of
war. She was a girl dressed exerting force without words or action. Fidel Castro's aggressive gaze can
up. But she believed, and reduce his opponents to silence. When Benito Mussolini was challenged,
had made others willing to he would roll his eyes, showing the whites in a way that frightened people.
believe, that she was the
President Kusnasosro Sukarno of Indonesia had a gaze that seemed as if it
mouthpiece of God. • On
Friday, April 29th, 1429, could have read thoughts. Roosevelt could dilate his pupils at will, making
the news spread in Orléans his stare both hypnotizing and intimidating. The eyes of the Charismatic
that a force, led by the
never show fear or nerves.
Pucelle of Domrémy, was
on its way to the relief of All of these skills are acquirable. Napoleon spent hours in front of a
the city, a piece of news mirror, modeling his gaze on that of the great contemporary actor Talma.
which, as the chronicler
The key is self-control. The look does not necessarily have to be aggressive;
remarks, comforted them
greatly. it can also show contentment. Remember: your eyes can emanate charisma,
but they can also give you away as a faker. Do not leave such an important
—VITA SACKVILLE-WEST,
SAINT JOAN OF ARC attribute to chance. Practice the effect you desire.
Genuine charisma thus means the ability to internally gen-
erate and externally express extreme excitement, an ability
which makes one the object of intense attention and unre-
flective imitation by others.
—LIAH GREENFIELD
Charismatic Types—Historical Examples
The miraculous prophet. In the year 1425, Joan of Arc, a peasant girl
from the French village of Domrémy, had her first vision: "I was in my
thirteenth year when God sent a voice to guide me." The voice was that of
Saint Michael and he came with a message from God: Joan had been cho-
sen to rid France of the English invaders who now ruled most of the
country, and of the resulting chaos and war. She was also to restore the
French crown to the prince—the Dauphin, later Charles VII—who was its
rightful heir. Saint Catherine and Saint Margaret also spoke to Joan. Her
visions were extraordinarily vivid: she saw Saint Michael, touched him,
smelled him.

[PAGE 131]
The Charismatic • 103
At first Joan told no one what she had seen; for all anyone knew, she Amongst the surplus
was a quiet farm girl. But the visions became even more intense, and so in population living on the
margin of society [in the
1429 she left Domrémy, determined to realize the mission for which God
Middle Ages] there was
had chosen her. Her goal was to meet Charles in the town of Chinon,
always a strong tendency to
where he had established his court in exile. The obstacles were enor- take as leader a layman, or
mous: Chinon was far, the journey was dangerous, and Charles, even if she maybe an apostate friar or
monk, who imposed
reached him, was a lazy and cowardly young man who was unlikely to cru-
himself not simply as a
sade against the English. Undaunted, she moved from village to village, ex- holy man but as a prophet
plaining her mission to soldiers and asking them to escort her to Chinon. or even as a living god. On
the strength of inspirations
Young girls with religious visions were a dime a dozen at the time, and
or revelations for which he
there was nothing in Joan's appearance to inspire confidence; one soldier, claimed divine origin this
however, Jean de Metz, was intrigued with her. What fascinated him was leader would decree for his
followers a communal
the detail of her visions: she would liberate the besieged town of Orléans,
mission of vast dimensions
have the king crowned at the cathedral in Reims, lead the army to Paris; and world-shaking
she knew how she would be wounded, and where; the words she attributed importance. The conviction
of having such a mission,
to Saint Michael were quite unlike the language of a farm girl; and she was
of being divinely appointed
so calmly confident, she glowed with conviction. De Metz fell under her
to carry out a prodigious
spell. He swore allegiance and set out with her for Chinon. Soon others of- task, provided the
fered assistance, too, and word reached Charles of the strange young girl on disoriented and the
frustrated with new
her way to meet him.
bearings and new hope. It
On the 350-mile road to Chinon, accompanied only by a handful of gave them not simply a
soldiers, through a land infested with warring bands, Joan showed neither place in the world but a
unique and resplendent
fear nor hesitation. The journey took several months. When she finally ar-
place. A fraternity of this
rived, the Dauphin decided to meet the girl who had promised to restore kind felt itself an elite, set
him to his throne, despite the advice of his counselors; but he was bored, infinitely apart from and
above ordinary mortals,
and wanted amusement, and decided to play a trick on her. She was to
sharing also in his
meet him in a hall packed with courtiers; to test her prophetic powers, he miraculous powers.
disguised himself as one of these men, and dressed another man as the
—NORMAN COHN,
prince. Yet when Joan arrived, to the amazement of the crowd, she walked THE PURSUIT OF THE
straight up to Charles and curtseyed: "The King of Heaven sends me to MILLENNIUM
you with the message that you shall be the lieutenant of the King of
Heaven, who is the king of France." In the talk that followed, Joan seemed
to echo Charles's most private thoughts, while once again recounting in
extraordinary detail the feats she would accomplish. Days later, this indeci-
sive, flighty man declared himself convinced and gave her his blessing to
lead a French army against the English.
Miracles and saintliness aside, Joan of Arc had certain basic qualities that
made her exceptional. Her visions were intense; she could describe them in
such detail that they had to be real. Details have that effect: they lend a
sense of reality to even the most preposterous statements. Furthermore, in a
time of great disorder, she was supremely focused, as if her strength came
from somewhere unworldly. She spoke with authority, and she predicted
things people wanted: the English would be defeated, prosperity would re-
turn. She also had a peasant's earthy common sense. She had surely heard
descriptions of Charles on the road to Chinon; once at court, she could

[PAGE 132]
104 • The Art of Seduction
"How peculiar have sensed the trick he was playing on her, and could have confidently
[Rasputin's] eyes are," picked out his pampered face in the crowd. The following year, her visions
confesses a woman who
abandoned her, and her confidence as well—she made many mistakes,
had made efforts to resist
his influence. She goes on leading to her capture by the English. She was indeed human.
to say that every time she We may no longer believe in miracles, but anything that hints at
met him she was always
strange, unworldly, even supernatural powers will create charisma. The psy-
amazed afresh at the power
chology is the same: you have visions of the future, and of the wondrous
of his glance, which it was
impossible to withstand for things you can accomplish. Describe these things in great detail, with an air
any considerable time. of authority, and suddenly you stand out. And if your prophecy—of pros-
There was something
perity, say—is just what people want to hear, they are likely to fall under
oppressive in this kind and
gentle, but at the same your spell and to see later events as a confirmation of your predictions. Ex-
time sly and cunning, hibit remarkable confidence and people will think your confidence comes
glance; people were helpless
from real knowledge. You will create a self-fulfilling prophecy: people's be-
under the spell of the
powerful will which could lief in you will translate into actions that help realize your visions. Any hint
be felt in his whole being. of success will make them see miracles, uncanny powers, the glow of
However tired you might
charisma.
be of this charm, and
however much you wanted
to escape it, somehow or
other you always found The authentic animal. One day in 1905, the St. Petersburg salon of
yourself attracted back and
Countess Ignatiev was unusually full. Politicians, society ladies, and courtiers
held. • A young girl who
had heard of the strange had all arrived early to await the remarkable guest of honor: Grigori Efi-
new saint came from her movich Rasputin, a forty-year-old Siberian monk who had made a name
province to the capital, and
for himself throughout Russia as a healer, perhaps a saint. When Rasputin
visited him in search of
edification and spiritual arrived, few could disguise their disappointment: his face was ugly, his hair
instruction. She had never was stringy, he was gangly and awkward. They wondered why they had
seen either him or a
come. But then Rasputin approached them one by one, wrapping his big
portrait of him before, and
hands around their fingers and gazing deep into their eyes. At first his gaze
met him for the first time
in his house. When he was unsettling: as he looked them up and down, he seemed to be probing
came up to her and spoke and judging them. Yet suddenly his expression would change, and kindness,
to her, she thought him like
joy, and understanding would radiate from his face. Several of the ladies he
one of the peasant
preachers she had often actually hugged, in a most effusive manner. This startling contrast had pro-
seen in her own country found effects.
home. His gentle, monastic
The mood in the salon soon changed from disappointment to excite-
gaze and the plainly parted
light brown hair around the ment. Rasputin's voice was so calm and deep; his language was coarse, yet
worthy simple face, all at the ideas it expressed were delightfully simple, and had the ring of great
first inspired her confidence.
spiritual truth. Then, just as the guests were beginning to relax with this
But when he came nearer
to her, she felt immediately dirty-looking peasant, his mood suddenly changed to anger: "I know you,
that another quite different I can read your souls. You are all too pampered. . . . These fine clothes and
man, mysterious, crafty,
arts of yours are useless and pernicious. Men must learn to humble them-
and corrupting, looked out
selves! You must be simpler, far, far simpler. Only then will God come
from behind the eyes that
radiated goodness and nearer to you." The monk's face grew animated, his pupils expanded, he
gentleness. • He sat down looked completely different. How impressive that angry look was, recalling
opposite her, edged quite
Jesus throwing the moneylenders from the temple. Now Rasputin calmed
close up to her, and his
light blue eyes changed down, returned to being gracious, but the guests already saw him as some-
color, and became deep and one strange and remarkable. Next, in a performance he would soon repeat

[PAGE 133]
The Charismatic • 105
in salons throughout the city, he led the guests in a folk song, and as they dark. A keen glance
sang, he began to dance, a strange uninhibited dance of his own design, reached her from the corner
of his eyes, bored into her,
and as he danced, he circled the most attractive women there, and with his
and held her fascinated.
eyes invited them to join him. The dance turned vaguely sexual; as his A leaden heaviness
partners fell under his spell, he whispered suggestive comments in their overpowered her limbs as
his great wrinkled face,
ears. Yet none of them seemed to be offended.
distorted with desire, came
Over the next few months, women from every level of St. Petersburg
closer to hers. She felt his
society visited Rasputin in his apartment. He would talk to them of spiri- hot breath on her cheeks,
tual matters, but then without warning he would turn sexual, murmuring and saw how his eyes,
burning from the depths of
the crassest come-ons. He would justify himself through spiritual dogma:
their sockets, furtively roved
how can you repent if you have not sinned? Salvation only comes to those over her helpless body, until
who go astray. One of the few who rejected his advances was asked by a he dropped his lids with a
sensuous expression. His
friend, "How can one refuse anything to a saint?" "Does a saint need sinful
voice had fallen to a
love?" she replied. Her friend said, "He makes everything that comes near passionate whisper, and he
him holy. I have already belonged to him, and I am proud and happy to murmured strange,
voluptuous words in her
have done so." "But you are married! What does your husband say?" "He
ear. • Just as she was on
considers it a very great honor. If Rasputin desires a woman we all think it
the point of abandoning
a blessing and a distinction, our husbands as well as ourselves." herself to her seducer, a
memory stirred in her
Rasputin's spell soon extended over Czar Nicholas and more particu-
dimly and as if from some
larly over his wife, the Czarina Alexandra, after he apparently healed their
far distance; she recalled
son from a life-threatening injury. Within a few years, he had become the that she had come to ask
most powerful man in Russia, with total sway over the royal couple. him about God.
—RENÉ FÜLÖP-MILLER,
People are more complicated than the masks they wear in society. The man RASPUTIN: THE HOLY DEVIL
who seems so noble and gentle is probably disguising a dark side, which
will often come out in strange ways; if his nobility and refinement are in
fact a put-on, sooner or later the truth will out, and his hypocrisy will dis-
appoint and alienate. On the other hand, we are drawn to people who
seem more comfortably human, who do not bother to disguise their con-
tradictions. This was the source of Rasputin's charisma. A man so authenti-
cally himself, so devoid of self-consciousness or hypocrisy, was immensely
appealing. His wickedness and saintliness were so extreme that it made him
seem larger than life. The result was a charismatic aura that was immediate
and preverbal; it radiated from his eyes, and from the touch of his hands.
Most of us are a mix of the devil and the saint, the noble and the igno-
ble, and we spend our lives trying to repress the dark side. Few of us can
give free rein to both sides, as Rasputin did, but we can create charisma to a
smaller degree by ridding ourselves of self-consciousness, and of the dis-
comfort most of us feel about our complicated natures. You cannot help
being the way you are, so be genuine. That is what attracts us to animals:
beautiful and cruel, they have no self-doubt. That quality is doubly fasci-
nating in humans. Outwardly people may condemn your dark side, but it is
not virtue alone that creates charisma; anything extraordinary will do. Do
not apologize or go halfway. The more unbridled you seem, the more mag-
netic the effect.

[PAGE 134]
106 • The Art of Seduction
By its very nature, the The demonic performer. Throughout his childhood Elvis Presley was
existence of charismatic thought a strange boy who kept pretty much to himself. In high school in
authority is specifically
Memphis, Tennessee, he attracted attention with his pompadoured hair and
unstable. The holder may
forego his charisma; he sideburns, his pink and black clothing, but people who tried to talk to him
may feel "forsaken by his found nothing there—he was either terribly bland or hopelessly shy. At the
God," as Jesus did on the high school prom, he was the only boy who didn't dance. He seemed lost
cross; he may prove to his
in a private world, in love with the guitar he took everywhere. At the Ellis
followers that "virtue
is gone out of him." It is Auditorium, at the end of an evening of gospel music or wrestling, the
then that his mission concessions manager would often find Elvis onstage, miming a perfor-
is extinguished, and hope
mance and taking bows before an imaginary audience. Asked to leave, he
waits and searches for a
new holder of charisma. would quietly walk away. He was a very polite young man.
In 1953, just out of high school, Elvis recorded his first song, in a local
—MAX WEBER, FROM MAX
WEBER: ESSAYS IN SOCIOLOGY, studio. The record was a test, a chance for him to hear his own voice. A
EDITED BY HANS GERTH AND year later the owner of the studio, Sam Phillips, called him in to record two
C. WRIGHT MILLS
blues songs with a couple of professional musicians. They worked for
hours, but nothing seemed to click; Elvis was nervous and inhibited. Then,
near the end of the evening, giddy with exhaustion, he suddenly let loose
and started to jump around like a child, in a moment of complete self-
abandon. The other musicians joined in, the song getting wilder and
wilder. Phillips's eyes lit up—he had something here.
A month later Elvis gave his first public performance, outdoors in a
Memphis park. He was as nervous as he had been at the recording session,
and could only stutter when he had to speak; but once he broke into song,
the words came out. The crowd responded excitedly, rising to peaks at
certain moments. Elvis couldn't figure out why. "I went over to the man-
ager after the song," he later said, "and I asked him what was making the
crowd go nuts. He told me, 'I'm not really sure, but I think that every
time you wiggle your left leg, they start to scream. Whatever it is, just
don't stop.'
A single Elvis recorded in 1954 became a hit. Soon he was in demand.
Going onstage filled him with anxiety and emotion, so much so that he
became a different person, as if possessed. "I've talked to some singers
and they get a little nervous, but they say their nerves kind of settle down
after they get into it. Mine never do. It's sort of this energy . . . something
maybe like sex." Over the next few months he discovered more gestures
and sounds—twitching dance movements, a more tremulous voice—that
made the crowds go crazy, particularly teenage girls. Within a year he had
become the hottest musician in America. His concerts were exercises in
mass hysteria.
Elvis Presley had a dark side, a secret life. (Some have attributed it to the
death, at birth, of his twin brother.) This dark side he deeply repressed as a
young man; it included all kinds of fantasies which he could only give in to
when he was alone, although his unconventional clothing may also have
been a symptom of it. When he performed, though, he was able to let
these demons loose. They came out as a dangerous sexual power. Twitch-

[PAGE 135]
The Charismatic • 107
ing, androgynous, uninhibited, he was a man enacting strange fantasies be- He is their god. He leads
fore the public. The audience sensed this and was excited by it. It wasn't a them like a thing \ Made
by some other deity than
flamboyant style and appearance that gave Elvis charisma, but rather the
nature, \ That shapes man
electrifying expression of his inner turmoil. better; and they follow him
A crowd or group of any sort has a unique energy. Just below the sur- \ Against us brats with no
less confidence \ Than boys
face is desire, a constant sexual excitement that has to be repressed because
pursuing summer butterflies
it is socially unacceptable. If you have the ability to rouse those desires, the
\ Or butchers killing
crowd will see you as having charisma. The key is learning to access your flies. . . .
own unconscious, as Elvis did when he let go. You are full of an excite-
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
ment that seems to come from some mysterious inner source. Your unin- CORIOLANUS
hibitedness will invite other people to open up, sparking a chain reaction:
their excitement in turn will animate you still more. The fantasies you
bring to the surface do not have to be sexual—any social taboo, anything The roof did lift as Presley
came onstage. He sang for
repressed and yearning for an outlet, will suffice. Make this felt in your
twenty-five minutes while
recordings, your artwork, your books. Social pressure keeps people so re- the audience erupted like
pressed that they will be attracted to your charisma before they have even Mount Vesuvius. "I never
met you in person. saw such excitement and
screaming in my entire life,
ever before or since," said
[film director Hal] Kanter.
The Savior. In March of 1917, the Russian parliament forced the coun- As an observer, he
describ-ed being stunned by
try's ruler, Czar Nicholas, to abdicate and established a provisional govern-
"an exhibition of public
ment. Russia was in rums. Its participation in World War I had been a mass hysteria . . . a tidal
disaster; famine was spreading widely, the vast countryside was riven by wave of adoration surging
up from 9,000 people,
looting and lynch law, and soldiers were deserting from the army en masse.
over the wall of police
Politically the country was bitterly divided; the main factions were the flanking the stage, up over
right, the social democrats, and the left-wing revolutionaries, and each of the flood-lights, to the
performer and beyond him,
these groups was itself afflicted by dissension.
lifting him to frenzied
Into this chaos came the forty-seven-year-old Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. A heights of response."
Marxist revolutionary, the leader of the Bolshevik Communist party, he
—A DESCRIPTION OF ELVIS
had suffered a twelve-year exile in Europe until, recognizing the chaos PRESLEY'S CONCERT AT THE
overcoming Russia as the chance he had long been waiting for, he had hur- HAYRIDE THEATER, SHREVEPORT,
LOUISIANA, DECEMBER 17, 1956,
ried back home. Now he called for the country to end its participation in
IN PETER WHITMER, THE INNER
the war and for an immediate socialist revolution. In the first weeks after his ELVIS: A PSYCHOLOGICAL
arrival, nothing could have seemed more ridiculous. As a man, Lenin BIOGRAPHY OF ELVIS AARON
PRESLEY
looked unimpressive; he was short and plain-featured. He had also spent
years away in Europe, isolated from his people and immersed in reading and
intellectual argument. Most important, his party was small, representing
only a splinter group within the loosely organized left coalition. Few took
him seriously as a national leader.
Undaunted, Lenin went to work. Wherever he went, he repeated the
same simple message: end the war, establish the rule of the proletariat,
abolish private property, redistribute wealth. Exhausted with the nation's
endless political infighting and the complexity of its problems, people be-
gan to listen. Lenin was so determined, so confident. He never lost his
cool. In the midst of a raucous debate, he would simply and logically de-
bunk each one of his adversaries' points. Workers and soldiers were im-

[PAGE 136]
108 • The Art of Seduction
No one could so fire others pressed by his firmness. Once, in the midst of a brewing riot, Lenin amazed
with theif plans, no one his chauffeur by jumping onto the running board of his car and directing
could so impose his will
the way through the crowd, at considerable personal risk. Told that his ideas
and conquer by force of his
had nothing to do with reality, he would answer, "So much the worse for
personality as this
seemingly so ordinary and reality!"
somewhat coarse man who Allied to Lenin's messianic confidence in his cause was his ability to or-
lacked any obvious sources
ganize. Exiled in Europe, his party had been scattered and diminished; in
of charm. . . . Neither
Plekhanov nor Martov nor keeping them together he had developed immense practical skills. In front
anyone else possessed the of a large crowd, he was a also powerful orator. His speech at the First All-
secret radiating from Lenin
Russian Soviet Congress made a sensation; either revolution or a bourgeois
of positively hypnotic effect
upon people—I would government, he cried, but nothing in between—enough of this compro-
even say, domination of mise in which the left was sharing. At a time when other politicians were
them. Plekhanov was
scrambling desperately to adapt to the national crisis, and seemed weak in
treated with deference,
Martov was loved, but the process, Lenin was rock stable. His prestige soared, as did the member-
Lenin alone was followed ship of the Bolshevik party
unhesitatingly as the only
Most astounding of all was Lenin's effect on workers, soldiers, and peas-
indisputable leader. For
ants. He would address these common people wherever he found them—in
only Lenin represented that
rare phenomenon, the street, standing on a chair, his thumbs in his lapel, his speech an odd
especially rare in Russia, of mix of ideology, peasant aphorisms, and revolutionary slogans. They would
a man of iron will and
listen, enraptured. When Lenin died, in 1924—seven years after single-
indomitable energy who
combines fanatical faith in handedly opening the way to the October Revolution of 1917, which had
the movement, the cause, swept him and the Bolsheviks into power—these same ordinary Russians
with no less faith in
went into mourning. They worshiped at his tomb, where his body was
himself.
preserved on view; they told stories about him, developing a body of
—A. N. POTRESOV, QUOTED IN
Lenin folklore; thousands of newborn girls were christened "Ninel," Lenin
DANKWART A. RUSTOW, ED.,
PHILOSOPHERS AND KINGS: spelled backwards. This cult of Lenin assumed religious proportions.
STUDIES IN LEADERSHIP
There all kinds of misconceptions about charisma, which, paradoxically,
only add to its mystique. Charisma has little to do with an exciting physical
"I had hoped to see the
appearance or a colorful personality, qualities that elicit short—term interest.
mountain eagle of our
Particularly in times of trouble, people are not looking for entertainment—
party, the great man, great
physically as well as they want security, a better quality of life, social cohesion. Believe it or not,
politically. I had fancied a plain-looking man or woman with a clear vision, a quality of single-
Lenin as a giant, stately
mindedness, and practical skills can be devastatingly charismatic, provided it
and imposing. Mow great
was my disappointment to is matched with some success. Never underestimate the power of success in
see a most ordinary-looking enhancing one's aura. But in a world teeming with compromisers and
man, below average height,
fudgers whose indecisiveness only creates more disorder, one clear-minded
in no way, literally in no
way distinguishable from soul will be a magnet of attention—will have charisma.
ordinary mortals. " One on one, or in a Zurich cafe before the revolution, Lenin had little
—JOSEPH STALIN, ON MEETING or no charisma. (His confidence was attractive, but many found his strident
LENIN FOR THE FIRST TIME IN manner irritating.) He won charisma when he was seen as the man who
1905, QUOTED IN RONALD W.
could save the country. Charisma is not a mysterious quality that inhabits
CLARK, LENIN:THE MAN
BEHIND THE MASK you outside your control; it is an illusion in the eyes of those who see you
as having what they lack. Particularly in times of trouble, you can enhance
that illusion through calmness, resolution, and clear-minded practicality. It
also helps to have a seductively simple message. Call it the Savior Syn-

[PAGE 137]
The Charismatic • 109
drome: once people imagine you can save them from chaos, they will fall in Tirst and foremost there
love with you, like a person who melts in the arms of his or her rescuer. can be no prestige without
mystery, for familiarity
And mass love equals charisma. How else to explain the love ordinary Rus-
breeds contempt. ...In
sians felt for a man as emotionless and unexciting as Vladimir Lenin.
the design, the demeanor
and the mental operations
of a leader there must
always be a "something"
The guru. According to the beliefs of the Theosophical Society, every two
which others cannot
thousand years or so the spirit of the World Teacher, Lord Maitreya, inhab- altogether fathom, which
its the body of a human. First there was Sri Krishna, born two thousand puzzles them, stirs them,
and rivets their
years before Christ; then there was Jesus himself; and at the start of the
attention . . . to hold in
twentieth century another incarnation was due. One day in 1909, the reserve some piece of secret
theosophist Charles Leadbeater saw a boy on an Indian beach and had an knowledge which may any
moment intervene, and the
epiphany: this fourteen-year-old lad, Jiddu Krishnamurti, would be the
more effectively from being
World Teacher's next vehicle. Leadbeater was struck by the simplicity of
in the nature of a surprise.
the boy, who seemed to lack the slightest trace of selfishness. The members The latent faith of the
of the Theosophical Society agreed with his assessment and adopted this masses will do the rest.
Once the leader has been
scraggly underfed youth, whose teachers had repeatedly beaten him for stu-
fudged capable of adding
pidity. They fed and clothed him and began his spiritual instruction. The the weight of his
scruffy urchin turned into a devilishly handsome young man. personality to the known
factors of any situation, the
In 1911, the theosophists formed the Order of the Star in the East, a
ensuing hope and
group intended to prepare the way for the coming of the World Teacher. confidence will add
Krishnamurti was made head of the order. He was taken to England, where immensely to the faith
reposed in him.
his education continued, and everywhere he went he was pampered and
revered. His air of simplicity and contentment could not help but impress. —CHARLES DE GAULLE, THE
EDGE OF THE SWORD, IN DAVID
Soon Krishnamurti began to have visions. In 1922 he declared, "I have
SCHOENBRUN, THE THREE
drunk at the fountain of Joy and eternal Beauty. I am God-intoxicated." LIVES OF CHARLES DE GAULLE
Over the next few years he had psychic experiences that the theosophists
interpreted as visits from the World Teacher. But Krishnamurti had actually
had a different kind of revelation: the truth of the universe came from
within. No god, no guru, no dogma could ever make one realize it. He
himself was no god or messiah, but just another man. The reverence that
he was treated with disgusted him. In 1929, much to his followers' shock,
he disbanded the Order of the Star and resigned from the Theosophical
Society.
And so Krishnamurti became a philosopher, determined to spread the
truth he had discovered: you must be simple, removing the screen of lan-
guage and past experience. Through these means anyone could attain con-
tentment of the kind that radiated from Krishnamurti. The theosophists
abandoned him but his following grew larger than ever. In California,
where he spent much of his time, the interest in him verged on cultic ado-
ration. The poet Robinson Jeffers said that whenever Krishnamurti entered
a room you could feel a brightness filling the space. The writer Aldous
Huxley met him in Los Angeles and fell under his spell. Hearing him
speak, he wrote: "It was like listening to the discourse of the Buddha—
such power, such intrinsic authority." The man radiated enlightenment.
The actor John Barrymore asked him to play the role of Buddha in a film.

[PAGE 138]
110 • The Art of Seduction
Only a month after Evita's (Krishnamurti politely declined.) When he visited India, hands would
death, the newspaper reach out from the crowd to try to touch him through the open car win-
vendors' union put forward
dow. People prostrated themselves before him.
her name for canonization,
Repulsed by all this adoration, Krishnamurti grew more and more de-
and although this gesture
was an isolated one and tached. He even talked about himself in the third person. In fact, the ability
was never taken seriously to disengage from one's past and view the world anew was part of his phi-
by the Vatican, the idea of
losophy, yet once again the effect was the opposite of what he expected:
Evita's holiness remained
with many people and was the affection and reverence people felt for him only grew. His followers
reinforced by the fought jealously for signs of his favor. Women in particular fell deeply in
publication of devotional
love with him, although he was a lifelong celibate.
literature subsidized by
the government; by the
renaming of cities, schools, Krishnamurti had no desire to be a guru or a Charismatic, but he inadver-
and subway stations; and
tently discovered a law of human psychology that disturbed him. People do
by the stamping of
not want to hear that your power comes from years of effort or discipline.
medallions, the casting
of busts, and the issuing of They prefer to think that it comes from your personality, your character,
ceremonial stamps. The something you were born with. They also hope that proximity to the guru
time of the evening news
or Charismatic will make some of that power rub off on them. They did
broadcast was changed from
8:30 P.M. to 8:25 P.M., not want to have to read Krishnamurti's books, or to spend years practicing
the time when Evita had his lessons—they simply wanted to be near him, soak up his aura, hear him
"passed into immortality,"
speak, feel the light that entered the room with him. Krishnamurti advo-
and each month there were
torch-lit processions on the cated simplicity as a way of opening up to the truth, but his own simplicity
twenty-sixth of the month, just allowed people to see what they wanted in him, attributing powers to
the day of her death. On
him that he not only denied but ridiculed.
the first anniversary of her
death, La Prensa printed a This is the guru effect, and it is surprisingly simple to create. The aura
story about one of its you are after is not the fiery one of most Charismatics, but one of incan-
readers seeing Evita's face
descence, enlightenment. An enlightened person has understood some-
in the face of the moon,
thing that makes him or her content, and this contentment radiates outward.
and after this there were
many more such sightings That is the appearance you want: you do not need anything or anyone, you
reported in the newspapers. are fulfilled. People are naturally drawn to those who emit happiness;
For the most part, official
maybe they can catch it from you. The less obvious you are, the better: let
publications stopped short
of claiming sainthood for people conclude that you are happy, rather than hearing it from you. Let
her, but their restraint was them see it in your unhurried manner, your gentle smile, your ease and
not always convincing. . . .
comfort. Keep your words vague, letting people imagine what they will.
In the calendar for 1953 of
the Buenos Aires Remember: being aloof and distant only stimulates the effect. People
newspaper vendors, as in will fight for the slightest sign of your interest. A guru is content and
other unofficial images,
detached—a deadly Charismatic combination.
she was depicted in the
traditional blue robes of the
Virgin, her hands crossed,
her sad head to one side The drama saint. It began on the radio. Throughout the late 1930s and
and surrounded by a halo.
early 1940s, Argentine women would hear the plaintive, musical voice of
—NICHOLAS FRASER AND Eva Duarte in one of the lavishly produced soap operas that were so popu-
MARYSA NAYARRO. EVITA
lar at the time. She never made you laugh, but how often she could make
you cry—with the complaints of a betrayed lover, or the last words of
Marie Antoinette. The very thought of her voice made you shiver with
emotion. And she was pretty, with her flowing blond hair and her serious
face, which was often on the covers of the gossip magazines.

[PAGE 139]
The Charismatic • 111
In 1943, those magazines published a most exciting story: Eva had As for me, I have the gift
begun an affair with one of the most dashing men in the new military of electrifying men.
government, Colonel Juan Perón. Now Argentines heard her doing propa- —NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, IN
ganda spots for the government, lauding the "New Argentina" that glis- PIETER GEYL, NAPOLEON: FOR
AND AGAINST
tened in the future. And finally, this fairy tale story reached its perfect
conclusion: in 1945 Juan and Eva married, and the following year, the
handsome colonel, after many trials and tribulations (including a spell in
I do not pretend to be a
prison, from which he was freed by the efforts of his devoted wife) was
divine man, but I do
elected president. He was a champion of the descamisados—the "shirtless believe in divine guidance,
ones," the workers and the poor, just as his wife was. Only twenty-six at the divine power, and divine
prophecy. I am not
time, she had grown up in poverty herself.
educated, nor am I an
Now that this star was the first lady of the republic, she seemed to expert in any particular
change. She lost weight, most definitely; her outfits became less flamboy- field—but I am sincere and
my sincerity is my
ant, even downright austere; and that beautiful flowing hair was now pulled
credentials.
back, rather severely. It was a shame—the young star had grown up. But as
—MALCOLM X, QUOTED IN
Argentines saw more of the new Evita, as she was now known, her new
EUGENE VICTORWOLFENSTEIN,
look affected them more strongly. It was the look of a saintly, serious THE VICTIMS OF DEMOCRACY:
woman, one who was indeed what her husband called the "Bridge of MALCOLM X AND THIS BLACK
REVOLUTION
Love" between himself and his people. She was now on the radio all the
time, and listening to her was as emotional as ever, but she also spoke mag-
nificently in public. Her voice was lower and her delivery slower; she
stabbed the air with her fingers, reached out as if to touch the audience.
And her words pierced you to the core: "I left my dreams by the wayside in
order to watch over the dreams of others. ... I now place my soul at the
side of the soul of my people. I offer them all my energies so that my body
may be a bridge erected toward the happiness of all. Pass over it ... toward
the supreme destiny of the new fatherland."
It was no longer only through magazines and the radio that Evita made
herself felt. Almost everyone was personally touched by her in some way.
Everyone seemed to know someone who had met her, or who had visited
her in her office, where a line of supplicants wound its way through the
hallways to her door. Behind her desk she sat, so calm and full of love. Film
crews recorded her acts of charity: to a woman who had lost everything,
Evita would give a house; to one with a sick child, free care in the finest
hospital. She worked so hard, no wonder rumor had it that she was ill. And
everyone heard of her visits to the shanty towns and to hospitals for the
poor, where, against the wishes of her staff, she would kiss people with all
kinds of maladies (lepers, syphilitic men, etc.) on the cheek. Once an assis-
tant appalled by this habit tried to dab Evita's lips with alcohol, to sterilize
them. This saint of a woman grabbed the bottle and smashed it against the
wall.
Yes, Evita was a saint, a living madonna. Her appearance alone could
heal the sick. And when she died of cancer, in 1952, no outsider to Ar-
gentina could possibly understand the sense of grief and loss she left be-
hind. For some, the country never recovered.
* * *

[PAGE 140]
112 • The Art of Seduction
Most of us live in a semi-somnambulistic state: we do our daily tasks and
the days fly by. The two exceptions to this are childhood and those mo-
ments when we are in love. In both cases, our emotions are more engaged,
more open and active. And we equate feeling emotional with feeling more
alive. A public figure who can affect people's emotions, who can make
them feel communal sadness, joy, or hope, has a similar effect. An appeal to
the emotions is far more powerful than an appeal to reason.
Eva Perón knew this power early on, as a radio actress. Her tremulous
voice could make audiences weep; because of this, people saw in her great
charisma. She never forgot the experience. Her every public act was framed
in dramatic and religious motifs. Drama is condensed emotion, and the
Catholic religion is a force that reaches into your childhood, hits you where
you cannot help yourself. Evita's uplifted arms, her staged acts of charity,
her sacrifices for the common folk—all this went straight to the heart. It
was not her goodness alone that was charismatic, although the appear-
ance of goodness is alluring enough. It was her ability to dramatize her
goodness.
You must learn to exploit the two great purveyors of emotion: drama
and religion. Drama cuts out the useless and banal in life, focusing on mo-
ments of pity and terror; religion deals with matters of life and death.
Make your charitable actions dramatic, give your loving words religious
import, bathe everything in rituals and myths going back to childhood.
Caught up in the emotions you stir, people will see over your head the halo
of charisma.
The deliverer. In Harlem in the early 1950s, few African-Americans knew
much about the Nation of Islam, or ever stepped into its temple. The Na-
tion preached that white people were descended from the devil and that
someday Allah would liberate the black race. This doctrine had little mean-
ing for Harlemites, who went to church for spiritual solace and turned in
practical matters to their local politicians. But in 1954, a new minister for
the Nation of Islam arrived in Harlem.
The minister's name was Malcolm X, and he was well-read and elo-
quent, yet his gestures and words were angry. Word spread: whites had
lynched Malcolm's father. He had grown up in a juvenile facility, then had
survived as a small-time hustler before being arrested for burglary and
spending six years in prison. His short life (he was only twenty—nine at the
time) had been one long run-in with the law, yet look at him now—so
confident and educated. No one had helped him; he had done it all on his
own. Harlemites began to see Malcolm X everywhere, handing out fliers,
addressing the young. He would stand outside their churches, and as the
congregation dispersed, he would point to the preacher and say, "He repre-
sents the white man's god; I represent the black man's god." The curious
began to come to hear him preach at a Nation of Islam temple. He would
ask them to look at the actual conditions of their lives: "When you get

[PAGE 141]
The Charismatic • 113
through looking at where you live, then . . . take a walk across Central
Park," he would tell them. "Look at the white man's apartments. Look
at his Wall Street!" His words were powerful, particularly coming from a
minister.
In 1957, a young Muslim in Harlem witnessed the beating of a
drunken black man by several policemen. When the Muslim protested, the
police pummeled him senseless and carted him off to jail. An angry crowd
gathered outside the police station, ready to riot. Told that only Malcolm X
could forestall violence, the police commissioner brought him in and told
him to break up the mob. Malcolm refused. Speaking more temperately,
the commissioner begged him to reconsider. Malcolm calmly set conditions
for his cooperation: medical care for the beaten Muslim, and proper
punishment for the police officers. The commissioner reluctantly agreed.
Outside the station, Malcolm explained the agreement and the crowd
dispersed. In Harlem and around the country, he was an overnight hero—
finally a man who took action. Membership in his temple soared.
Malcolm began to speak all over the United States. He never read from
a text; looking out at the audience, he made eye contact, pointed his finger.
His anger was obvious, not so much in his tone—he was always controlled
and articulate—as in his fierce energy, the veins popping out on his neck.
Many earlier black leaders had used cautious words, and had asked their fol-
lowers to deal patiently and politely with their social lot, no matter how
unfair. What a relief Malcolm was. He ridiculed the racists, he ridiculed
the liberals, he ridiculed the president; no white person escaped his scorn.
If whites were violent, Malcolm said, the language of violence should be
spoken back to them, for it was the only language they understood. "Hos-
tility is good!" he cried out. "It's been bottled up too long." In response to
the growing popularity of the nonviolent leader Martin Luther King, Jr.,
Malcolm said, "Anybody can sit. An old woman can sit. A coward can
sit. ... It takes a man to stand."
Malcolm X had a bracing effect on many who felt the same anger he
did but were frightened to express it. At his funeral—he was assassinated in
1965, at one of his speeches—the actor Ossie Davis delivered the eulogy
before a large and emotional crowd: "Malcolm," he said, "was our own
black shining prince."
Malcolm X was a Charismatic of Moses' kind: he was a deliverer. The
power of this sort of Charismatic comes from his or her expression of dark
emotions that have built up over years of oppression. In doing so, the deliv-
erer provides an opportunity for the release of bottled-up emotions by
other people—of the hostility masked by forced politeness and smiles. De-
liverers have to be one of the suffering crowd, only more so: their pain
must be exemplary. Malcolm's personal history was an integral part of his
charisma. His lesson—that blacks should help themselves, not wait for
whites to lift them up—meant a great deal more because of his own years
in prison, and because he had followed his own doctrine by educating him-

[PAGE 142]
114 • The Art of Seduction
self, lifting himself up from the bottom. The deliverer must be a living ex-
ample of personal redemption.
The essence of charisma is an overpowering emotion that communi-
cates itself in your gestures, In your tone of voice, in subtle signs that are
the more powerful for being unspoken. You feel something more deeply
than others, and no emotion is more powerful and more capable of creating
a charismatic reaction than hatred, particularly if it comes from deep-
rooted feelings of oppression. Express what others are afraid to express and
they will see great power in you. Say what they want to say but cannot.
Never be afraid of going too far. If you represent a release from oppression,
you have the leeway to go still farther. Moses spoke of violence, of destroy-
ing every last one of his enemies. Language like this brings the oppressed
together and makes them feel more alive. This is not, however, something
that is uncontrollable on your part. Malcolm X felt rage from early on, but
only in prison did he teach himself the art of oratory, and how to channel
his emotions. Nothing is more charismatic than the sense that someone is
struggling with great emotion rather than simply giving in to it.
The Olympian actor. On January 24, 1960 an insurrection broke out in
Algeria, then still a French colony. Led by right-wing French soldiers, its
purpose was to forestall the proposal of President Charles de Gaulle to
grant Algeria the right of self-determination. If necessary, the insurrection-
ists would take over Algeria in the name of France.
For several tense days, the seventy-year-old de Gaulle maintained a
strange silence. Then on January 29, at eight in the evening, he appeared
on French national television. Before he had uttered a word, the audience
was astonished, for he wore his old uniform from World War II, a uniform
that everyone recognized and that created a strong emotional response. De
Gaulle had been the hero of the resistance, the savior of the country at its
darkest moment. But that uniform had not been seen for quite some time.
Then de Gaulle spoke, reminding his public, in his cool and confident
manner, of all they had accomplished together in liberating France from
the Germans. Slowly he moved from these charged patriotic issues to the
rebellion in Algeria, and the affront it presented to the spirit of the libera-
tion. He finished his address by repeating his famous words of June 18,
1940: "Once again I call all Frenchmen, wherever they are, whatever they
are, to reunite with France. Vive la République! Vive la France!"
The speech had two purposes. It showed that de Gaulle was deter-
mined not to give an inch to the rebels, and it reached for the heart of all
patriotic Frenchmen, particularly in the army. The insurrection quickly
died, and no one doubted the connection between its failure and de
Gaulle's performance on television.
The following year, the French voted overwhelmingly in favor of Al-
gerian self-determination. On April 11, 1961, de Gaulle gave a press con-
ference in which he made it clear that France would soon grant the

[PAGE 143]
The Charismatic • 115
country full independence. Eleven days later, French generals in Algeria is-
sued a communique stating that they had taken over the country and de-
claring a state of siege. This was the most dangerous moment of all: faced
with Algeria's imminent independence, these right-wing generals would go
all the way. A civil war could break out, toppling de Gaulle's government.
The following night, de Gaulle appeared once again on television, once
again wearing his old uniform. He mocked the generals, comparing them
to a South American junta. He talked calmly and sternly. Then, suddenly,
at the very end of the address, his voice rose and even trembled as he called
out to the audience: "Françaises, Français, aidez-moi!" ("Frenchwomen,
Frenchmen, help me!") It was the most stirring moment of all his televi-
sion appearances. French soldiers in Algeria, listening on transistor radios,
were overwhelmed. The next day they held a mass demonstration in favor
of de Gaulle. Two days later the generals surrendered. On July 1, 1962, de
Gaulle proclaimed Algeria's independence.
In 1940, after the German invasion of France, de Gaulle escaped to En-
gland to recruit an army that would eventually return to France for the lib-
eration. At the beginning, he was alone, and his mission seemed hopeless.
But he had the support of Winston Churchill, and with Churchill's blessing
he gave a series of radio talks that the BBC broadcast to France. His
strange, hypnotic voice, with its dramatic tremolos, would enter French liv-
ing rooms in the evenings. Few of his listeners even knew what he looked
like, but his tone was so confident, so stirring, that he recruited a silent
army of believers. In person, de Gaulle was a strange, brooding man whose
confident manner could just as easily irritate as win over. But over the radio
that voice had intense charisma. De Gaulle was the first great master of
modern media, for he easily transferred his dramatic skills to television,
where his iciness, his calmness, his total self-possession, made audiences feel
both comforted and inspired.
The world has grown more fractured. A nation no longer conies to-
gether on the streets or in the squares; it is brought together in living
rooms, where people watching television all over the country can simulta-
neously be alone and with others. Charisma must now be communicable
over the airwaves or it has no power. But it is in some ways easier to project
on television, both because television makes a direct one-on-one appeal
(the Charismatic seems to address you) and because charisma is fairly easy to
fake for the few moments you spend in front of the camera. As de Gaulle
understood, when appearing on television it is best to radiate calmness and
control, to use dramatic effects sparingly. De Gaulle's overall iciness made
doubly effective the brief moments in which he raised his voice, or let
loose a biting joke. By remaining calm and underplaying it, he hypnotized
his audience. (Your face can express much more if your voice is less stri-
dent.) He conveyed emotion visually—the uniform, the setting—and
through the use of certain charged words: the liberation, Joan of Arc. The
less he strained for effect, the more sincere he appeared.

[PAGE 144]
116 • The Art of Seduction
All this must be carefully orchestrated. Punctuate your calmness with
surprises; rise to a climax; keep things short and terse. The only thing that
cannot be faked is self-confidence, the key component to charisma since
the days of Moses. Should the camera lights betray your insecurity, all the
tricks in the world will not put your charisma back together again.
Symbol: The Lamp. Invisible to the eye, a current flowing
through a wire in a glass vessel generates a heat that
turns into candescence. All we see is the glow.
In the prevailing darkness, the Lamp
lights the way.
Dangers
On a pleasant May day in 1794, the citizens of Paris gathered in a park
for the Festival of the Supreme Being. The focus of their attention
was Maximilien de Robespierre, head of the Committee of Public Safety,
and the man who had thought up the festival in the first place. The idea was
simple: to combat atheism, "to recognize the existence of a Supreme Being
and the Immortality of the Soul as the guiding forces of the universe."
It was Robespierre's day of triumph. Standing before the masses in his
sky-blue suit and white stockings, he initiated the festivities. The crowd
adored him; after all, he had safeguarded the purposes of the French Revo-
lution through the intense politicking that had followed it. The year before,
he had initiated the Reign of Terror, which cleansed the revolution of its
enemies by sending them to the guillotine. He had also helped guide the
country through a war against the Austrians and the Prussians. What made
crowds, and particularly women, love him was his incorruptible virtue (he
lived very modestly), his refusal to compromise, the passion for the revolu-
tion that was evident in everything he did, and the romantic language of
his speeches, which could not fail to inspire. He was a god. The day was
beautiful and augured a great future for the revolution.
Two months later, on July 26, Robespierre delivered a speech that he

[PAGE 145]
The Charismatic • 117
thought would ensure his place in history, for he intended to hint at the
end of the Terror and a new era for France. Rumor also had it that he was
to call for a last handful of people to be sent to the guillotine, a final group
that threatened the safety of the revolution. Mounting the rostrum to ad-
dress the country's governing convention, Robespierre wore the same
clothes he had worn on the day of the festival. The speech was long, almost
three hours, and included an impassioned description of the values and
virtues he had helped protect. There was also talk of conspiracies, treach-
ery, unnamed enemies.
The response was enthusiastic, but a little less so than usual. The speech
had tired many representatives. Then a lone voice was heard, that of a man
named Bourdon, who spoke against printing Robespierre's speech, a veiled
sign of disapproval. Suddenly others stood up on all sides, and accused him
of vagueness: he had talked of conspiracies and threats without naming the
guilty. Asked to be specific, he refused, preferring to name names later on.
The next day Robespierre stood to defend his speech, and the representa-
tives shouted him down. A few hours later, he was the one sent to the guil-
lotine. On July 28, amid a gathering of citizens who seemed to be in an
even more festive mood than at the Festival of the Supreme Being, Robe-
spierre's head fell into the basket, to resounding cheers. The Reign of Ter-
ror was over.
Many of those who seemed to admire Robespierre actually harbored a
gnawing resentment of him—he was so virtuous, so superior, it was oppres-
sive. Some of these men had plotted against him, and were waiting for the
slightest sign of weakness—which appeared on that fateful day when he
gave his last speech. In refusing to name his enemies, he had shown either a
desire to end the bloodshed or a fear that they would strike at him before
he could have them killed. Fed by the conspirators, this one spark turned
into fire. Within two days, first a governing body and then a nation turned
against a Charismatic who two months before had been revered.
Charisma is as volatile as the emotions it stirs. Most often it stirs senti-
ments of love. But such feelings are hard to maintain. Psychologists talk of
"erotic fatigue"—the moments after love in which you feel tired of it, re-
sentful. Reality creeps in, love turns to hate. Erotic fatigue is a threat to all
Charismatics. The Charismatic often wins love by acting the savior, rescu-
ing people from some difficult circumstance, but once they feel secure,
charisma is less seductive to them. Charismatics need danger and risk. They
are not plodding bureaucrats; some of them deliberately keep danger go-
ing, as de Gaulle and Kennedy were wont to do, or as Robespierre did
through the Reign of Terror. But people tire of this, and at your first sign
of weakness they turn on you. The love they showed before will be
matched by their hatred now.
The only defense is to master your charisma. Your passion, your anger,
your confidence make you charismatic, but too much charisma for too
long creates fatigue, and a desire for calmness and order. The better kind of

[PAGE 146]
118 • The Art of Seduction
charisma is created consciously and is kept under control. When you need
to you can glow with confidence and fervor, inspiring the masses. But
when the adventure is over, you can settle into a routine, turning the heat,
not out, but down. (Robespierre may have been planning that move, but it
came a day too late.) People will admire your self-control and adaptability.
Their love affair with you will move closer to the habitual affection of a
man and wife. You will even have the leeway to look a little boring, a little
simple—a role that can also seem charismatic, if played correctly. Remem-
ber: charisma depends on success, and the best way to maintain success, af-
ter the initial charismatic rush, is to be practical and even cautious. Mao
Zedong was a distant, enigmatic man who for many had an awe-inspiring
charisma. He suffered many setbacks that would have spelled the end of a
less clever man, but after each reversal he retreated, becoming practical, tol-
erant, flexible; at least for a while. This protected him from the dangers of a
counterreaction.
There is another alternative: to play the armed prophet. According to
Machiavelli, although a prophet may acquire power through his charismatic
personality, he cannot long survive without the strength to back it up. He
needs an army. The masses will tire of him; they will need to be forced.
Being an armed prophet may not literally involve arms, but it demands a
forceful side to your character, which you can back up with action. Unfor-
tunately this means being merciless with your enemies for as long as you re-
tain power. And no one creates more bitter enemies than the Charismatic.
Finally, there is nothing more dangerous than succeeding a Charismatic.
These characters are unconventional, and their rule is personal in style, be-
ing stamped with the wildness of their personalities. They often leave chaos
in their wake. The one who follows after a Charismatic is left with a mess,
which the people, however, do not see. They miss their inspirer and blame
the successor. Avoid this situation at all costs. If it is unavoidable, do not try
to continue what the Charismatic started; go in a new direction. By being
practical, trustworthy, and plain-speaking, you can often generate a strange
kind of charisma through contrast. That was how Harry Truman not only
survived the legacy of Roosevelt but established his own type of charisma.

[PAGE 147]
Daily life is harsh, and most of us
constantly seek escape from it in fantasies and
dreams. Stars feed on this weakness; standing
out from others through a distinctive and appeal-
ing style, they make us want to watch them. At
the same time, they are vague and ethereal,
keeping their distance, and letting us imagine
more than is there. Their dreamlike quality
works on our unconscious; we are not even
aware how much we imitate them. Learn to be-
come an object of fascination by projecting the
glittering but elusive presence of the Star.

[PAGE 148]


[PAGE 149]
The Fetishistic Star
One day in 1922, in Berlin, Germany, a casting call went out for the
part of a voluptuous young woman in a film called Tragedy of Love. Of
the hundreds of struggling young actresses who showed up, most would do
anything to get the casting director's attention, including exposing them-
selves. There was one young woman in the line, however, who was simply
dressed, and performed none of the other girls' desperate antics. Yet she
stood out anyway. The cool, bright face which
didn't ask for anything,
The girl carried a puppy on a leash, and had draped an elegant necklace
which simply existed,
around the puppy's neck. The casting director noticed her immediately. He waiting—it was an empty
watched her as she stood in line, calmly holding the dog in her arms and face, he thought; a face that
could change with any
keeping to herself. When she smoked a cigarette, her gestures were slow
wind of expression. One
and suggestive. He was fascinated by her legs and face, the sinuous way she could dream into it
moved, the hint of coldness in her eyes. By the time she had come to the anything. It was like a
beautiful empty house
front, he had already cast her. Her name was Marlene Dietrich.
waiting for carpets and
By 1929, when the Austrian-American director Josef von Sternberg ar- pictures. It had all
rived in Berlin to begin work on the film The Blue Angel, the twenty- possibilities—it could
become a palace or a
seven-year-old Dietrich was well known in the Berlin film and theater
brothel. It depended on the
world. The Blue Angel was to be about a woman called Lola-Lola who preys one who filled it. How
sadistically on men, and all of Berlin's best actresses wanted the part—except, limited by comparison was
apparently, Dietrich, who made it known that she thought the role demean- all that was already
completed and labeled.
ing; von Sternberg should choose from the other actresses he had in mind.
Shortly after arriving in Berlin, however, von Sternberg attended a perfor- —ERICH MARIA REMARQUE,
ON MARLENE DIETRICH,
mance of a musical to watch a male actor he was considering for The Blue
ARCH OF TRIUMPH
Angel The star of the musical was Dietrich, and as soon as she came on-
stage, von Sternberg found that he could not take his eyes off her. She
stared at him directly, insolently, like a man; and then there were those legs, Marlene Dietrich is not an
and the way she leaned provocatively against the wall. Von Sternberg forgot actress, like Sarah
Bernhardt; she is a myth,
about the actor he had come to see. He had found his Lola-Lola.
like Phryne.
Von Sternberg managed to convince Dietrich to take the part, and im-
—ANDRÉ: MALRAUX, QUOTED IN
mediately he went to work, molding her into the Lola of his imagination.
EDGAR MORIN, THE STARS,
He changed her hair, drew a silver line down her nose to make it seem TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
thinner, taught her to look at the camera with the insolence he had seen HOWARD
onstage. When filming began, he created a lighting system just for her—a
light that tracked her wherever she went, and was strategically heightened
When Pygmalion saw
by gauze and smoke. Obsessed with his "creation," he followed her every-
these women, living such
where. No one else could go near her. wicked lives, he was
121

[PAGE 150]
122 • The Art of Seduction
The Blue Angel was a huge success in Germany. Audiences were fasci-
revolted by the many faults
which nature has nated with Dietrich: that cold, brutal stare as she spread her legs over a
implanted in the female stool, baring her underwear; her effortless way of commanding attention
sex, and long lived a
on screen. Others besides von Sternberg became obsessed with her. A man
bachelor existence, without
any wife to share his home. dying of cancer, Count Sascha Kolowrat, had one last wish: to see Mar-
But meanwhile, with lene's legs in person. Dietrich obliged, visiting him in the hospital and lift-
marvelous artistry, he
ing up her skirt; he sighed and said "Thank you. Now I can die happy."
skillfully carved a snowy
ivory statue. He made it Soon Paramount Studios brought Dietrich to Hollywood, where everyone
lovelier than any woman was quickly talking about her. At a party, all eyes would turn toward her
born, and fell in love with
when she came into the room. She would be escorted by the most hand-
his own creation. The
some men in Hollywood, and would be wearing an outfit both beautiful
statue had all the
appearance of a real girl, so and unusual—gold-lame pajamas, a sailor suit with a yachting cap. The
that it seemed to be alive, next day the look would be copied by women all over town; next it would
to want to move, did not
spread to magazines, and a whole new trend would start.
modesty forbid. So cleverly
did his art conceal its art. The real object of fascination, however, was unquestionably Dietrich's
Pygmalion gazed in face. What had enthralled von Sternberg was her blankness—with a simple
wonder, and in his heart
lighting trick he could make that face do whatever he wanted. Dietrich
there rose a passionate love
for this image of a human eventually stopped working with von Sternberg, but never forgot what he
form. Often he ran his had taught her. One night in 1951, the director Fritz Lang, who was about
hands over the work,
to direct her in the film Rancho Notorious, was driving past his office when
feeling it to see whether it
was flesh or ivory, and he saw a light flash in the window. Fearing a burglary, he got out of his car,
would not yet admit that crept up the stairs, and peeked through the crack in the door: it was Diet-
ivory was all it was. He
rich taking pictures of herself in the mirror, studying her face from every
kissed the statue, and
angle.
imagined that it kissed him
back, spoke to it and
embraced it, and thought Marlene Dietrich had a distance from her own self: she could study her
he felt his fingers sink into
face, her legs, her body, as if she were someone else. This gave her the
the limbs he touched, so
that he was afraid lest a ability to mold her look, transforming her appearance for effect. She could
bruise appear where he had pose in just the way that would most excite a man, her blankness letting
pressed the flesh.
him see her according to his fantasy, whether of sadism, voluptuousness, or
Sometimes he addressed it
in flattering speeches, danger. And every man who met her, or who watched her on screen, fan-
sometimes brought the kind tasized endlessly about her. The effect worked on women as well; in the
of presents that girls
words of one writer, she projected "sex without gender." But this self-
enjoy. . . . He dressed the
limbs of his statue in distance gave her a certain coldness, whether on film or in person. She was
woman's robes, and put like a beautiful object, something to fetishize and admire the way we ad-
rings on its fingers, long
mire a work of art.
necklaces round its
The fetish is an object that commands an emotional response and that
neck. . . . All this finery
became the image well, but makes us breathe life into it. Because it is an object we can imagine what-
it was no less lovely ever we want to about it. Most people are too moody, complex, and reac-
unadorned. Pygmalion
tive to let us see them as objects that we can fetishize. The power of the
then placed the statue on a
couch that was covered with Fetishistic Star comes from an ability to become an object, and not just any
cloths of Tynan purple, object but an object we fetishize, one that stimulates a variety of fantasies.
laid its head to rest on soft
Fetishistic Stars are perfect, like the statue of a Greek god or goddess. The
down pillows, as if it could
appreciate them, and called effect is startling, and seductive. Its principal requirement is self-distance. If
it his bedfellow. • The you see yourself as an object, then others will too. An ethereal, dreamlike
festival of Venus, which is
air will heighten the effect.
celebrated with the greatest

[PAGE 151]
The Star • 123
You are a blank screen. Float through life noncommittally and people pomp all through Cyprus,
will want to seize you and consume you. Of all the parts of your body that was now in progress, and
heifers, their crooked horns
draw this fetishistic attention, the strongest is the face; so learn to tune your
gilded for the occasion, had
face like an instrument, making it radiate a fascinating vagueness for effect.
fallen at the altar as the
And since you will have to stand out from other Stars in the sky, you will axe struck their snowy
need to develop an attention-getting style. Dietrich was the great practi- necks. Smoke was rising
from the incense, when
tioner of this art; her style was chic enough to dazzle, weird enough to en-
Pygmalion, having made
thrall. Remember, your own image and presence are materials you can his offering, stood by the
control. The sense that you are engaged in this kind of play will make peo- altar and timidly prayed,
saying: "If you gods can
ple see you as superior and worthy of imitation.
give all things, may I have
as my wife, I pray—"he
She had such natural poise . . . such an economy of ges- did not dare to say: "the
ture, that she became as absorbing as a Modigliani. . . . ivory maiden," but
finished: "one like the
She had the one essential star quality: she could be mag-
ivory maid." However,
nificent doing nothing. golden Venus, present at
her festival in person,
—BERLIN ACTRESS LILI DARVAS ON MARLENE DIETRICH understood what his
prayers meant, and as a
sign that the gods were
The Mythic Star kindly disposed, the flames
burned up three times,
shooting a tongue of fire
On July 2, 1960, a few weeks before that year's Democratic National into the air. When
Convention, former President Harry Truman publicly stated that Pygmalion returned home,
he made straight for the
John F. Kennedy—who had won enough delegates to be chosen his party's
statue of the girl he loved,
candidate for the presidency—was too young and inexperienced for the leaned over the couch, and
job. Kennedy's response was startling: he called a press conference, to be kissed her. She seemed
warm: he laid his lips on
televised live, and nationwide, on July 4. The conference's drama was
hers again, and touched her
heightened by the fact that he was away on vacation, so that no one saw or
breast with his hands—at
heard from him until the event itself. Then, at the appointed hour, his touch the ivory lost its
Kennedy strode into the conference room like a sheriff entering Dodge hardness, and grew soft.
City. He began by stating that he had run in all of the state primaries, at —OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
considerable expense of money and effort, and had beaten his opponents TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
fairly and squarely. Who was Truman to circumvent the democratic
process? "This is a young country," Kennedy went on, his voice getting
louder, "founded by young men . . . and still young in heart. . . . The [John F.] Kennedy
world is changing, the old ways will not do, . . . It is time for a new genera- brought to television news
and photojournalism the
tion of leadership to cope with new problems and new opportunities."
components most prevalent
Even Kennedy's enemies agreed that his speech that day was stirring. He in the world of film: star
turned Truman's challenge around: the issue was not his inexperience but quality and mythic story.
With his telegenic looks,
the older generation's monopoly on power. His style was as eloquent as
skills at self presentation,
his words, for his performance evoked films of the time—Alan Ladd in heroic fantasies, and
Shane confronting the corrupt older ranchers, or James Dean in Rebel With- creative intelligence,
Kennedy was brilliantly
out a Cause. Kennedy even resembled Dean, particularly in his air of cool
prepared to project a major
detachment. screen persona. He
A few months later, now approved as the Democrats' presidential can- appropriated the discourses
of mass culture, especially
didate, Kennedy squared off against his Republican opponent, Richard
of Hollywood, and
Nixon, in their first nationally televised debate. Nixon was sharp; he knew transferred them to the

[PAGE 152]
124 • The Art of Seduction
news. By this strategy he the answers to the questions and debated with aplomb, quoting statistics on
made the news like dreams the accomplishments of the Eisenhower administration, in which he had
and like the movies—a
served as vice-president. But beneath the glare of the cameras, on black and
realm in which images
played out scenarios that white television, he was a ghastly figure—his five o'clock shadow covered
accorded with the viewer's up with powder, streaks of sweat on his brow and cheeks, his face drooping
deepest yearnings. . . . with fatigue, his eyes shifting and blinking, his body rigid. What was he so
Never appearing in an
worried about? The contrast with Kennedy was startling. If Nixon looked
actual film, but rather
turning the television only at his opponent, Kennedy looked out at the audience, making eye
apparatus into his screen, contact with his viewers, addressing them in their living rooms as no politi-
he became the greatest
cian had ever done before. If Nixon talked data and niggling points of de-
movie star of the twentieth
century. bate, Kennedy spoke of freedom, of building a new society, of recapturing
America's pioneer spirit. His manner was sincere and emphatic. His words
—JOHN HELLMANN, THE
KENNEDY OBSESSION: THE were not specific, but he made his listeners imagine a wonderful future.
AMERICAN MYTH OF JFK The day after the debate, Kennedy's poll numbers soared miraculously,
and wherever he went he was greeted by crowds of young girls, screaming
and jumping. His beautiful wife Jackie by his side, he was a kind of demo-
But we have seen that, cratic prince. Now his television appearances were events. He was in due
considered as a total course elected president, and his inaugural address, also broadcast on televi-
phenomenon, the history of
sion, was stirring. It was a cold and wintry day. In the background, Eisen-
the stars repeats, in its own
proportions, the history of hower sat huddled in coat and scarf, looking old and beaten. But Kennedy
the gods. Before the gods stood hatless and coatless to address the nation: "I do not believe that any of
(before the stars) the
us would exchange places with any other people or any other generation.
mythical universe (the
screen) was peopled with The energy, the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will
specters or phantoms light our country and all who serve it—and the glow from that fire can
endowed with the glamour
truly light the world."
and magic of the double. •
Over the months to come Kennedy gave innumerable live press confer-
Several of these presences
have progressively assumed ences before the TV cameras, something no previous president had dared.
body and substance, have Facing the firing squad of lenses and questions, he was unafraid, speaking
taken form, amplified, and
coolly and slightly ironically. What was going on behind those eyes, that
flowered into gods and
goddesses. And even as smile? People wanted to know more about him. The magazines teased its
certain major gods of the readers with information—photographs of Kennedy with his wife and
ancient pantheons meta-
children, or playing football on the White House lawn, interviews creating
morphose themselves into
hero -gods of salvation, th e a sense of him as a devoted family man, yet one who mingled as an equal
star-goddesses humanize with glamorous stars. The images all melted together—the space race, the
themselves and become new
Peace Corps, Kennedy facing up to the Soviets during the Cuban missile
mediators between the
fantastic world of dreams crisis just as he had faced up to Truman.
and man's daily life on After Kennedy was assassinated, Jackie said in an interview that before
earth. ...• The heroes of
he went to bed, he would often play the soundtracks to Broadway musicals,
the movies . . . are, in an
and his favorite of these was Camelot, with its lines, "Don't let it be forgot /
obviously attenuated way,
mythological heroes in this that once there was a spot / For one brief shining moment / That was
sense of becoming divine. known as Camelot." There would be great presidents again, Jackie said, but
The star is the actor or
never "another Camelot." The name "Camelot" seemed to stick, making
actress who absorbs some of
the heroic—i.e., divinized Kennedy's thousand days in office resonate as myth.
and mythic—substance of
the hero or heroine of the
Kennedy's seduction of the American public was conscious and calculated.
movies, and who in turn
enriches this substance by It was also more Hollywood than Washington, which was not surprising:

[PAGE 153]
The Star • 125
Kennedy's father, Joseph, had once been a movie producer, and Kennedy his or her own contrib-
himself had spent time in Hollywood, hobnobbing with actors and trying ution. When we speak of
the myth of the star, we
to figure out what made them stars. He was particularly fascinated with
mean first of all the process
Gary Cooper, Montgomery Clift, and Cary Grant; he often called Grant of divinization which the
for advice. movie actor undergoes, a
Hollywood had found ways to unite the entire country around cer- process that makes him the
idol of crowds.
tain themes, or myths—often the great American myth of the West. The
great stars embodied mythic types: John Wayne the patriarch, Clift —EDGAR MORIN, THE STARS,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
the Promethean rebel, Jimmy Stewart the noble hero, Marilyn Monroe the HOWARD
siren. These were not mere mortals but gods and goddesses to be dreamed
and fantasized about. All of Kennedy's actions were framed in the conven-
tions of Hollywood. He did not argue with his opponents, he confronted
Age: 22, Sex: female,
them dramatically. He posed, and in visually fascinating ways—whether Nationality: British,
with his wife, with his children, or alone onstage. He copied the facial Profession: medical student
"[Deanna Durbin] became
expressions, the presence, of a Dean or a Cooper. He did not discuss
my first and only screen
policy details but waxed eloquent about grand mythic themes, the kind
idol. I wanted to be as
that could unite a divided nation. And all this was calculated for television, much like her as possible,
for Kennedy mostly existed as a televised image. That image haunted both in my manners and
clothes. Whenever I was to
our dreams. Well before his assassination, Kennedy attracted fantasies of
get a new dress, I would
America's lost innocence with his call for a renaissance of the pioneer spirit, find from my collection a
a New Frontier. particularly nice picture of
Deanna and ask for a dress
Of all the character types, the Mythic Star is perhaps the most powerful
like she was wearing. I did
of all. People are divided by all kinds of consciously recognized categories— my hair as much like hers
race, gender, class, religion, politics. It is impossible, then, to gain power on as 1 could manage. If I
found myself in any
a grand scale, or to win an election, by drawing on conscious awareness; an
annoying or aggravating
appeal to any one group will only alienate another. Unconsciously, how- situation . . . I found
ever, there is much we share. All of us are mortal, all of us know fear, all ofmyself wondering what
Deanna would do and
us have been stamped with the imprint of parent figures; and nothing con-
modified my own reactions
jures up this shared experience more than myth. The patterns of myth,
accordingly. ..." • Age:
born out of warring feelings of helplessness on the one hand and thirst for 26, Sex: female, Nation-
immortality on the other, are deeply engraved in us all. ality: British "I only fell in
love once with a movie
Mythic Stars are figures of myth come to life. To appropriate their
actor. It was Conrad Veidt.
power, you must first study their physical presence—how they adopt a dis- His magnetism and his
tinctive style, are cool and visually arresting. Then you must assume the personality got me. His
voice and gestures fascin-
pose of a mythic figure: the rebel, the wise patriarch, the adventurer. (The
ated me. I hated him,
pose of a Star who has struck one of these mythic poses might do the trick.) feared him, loved him.
Make these connections vague; they should never be obvious to the con- When he died it seemed to
me that a vital part of my
scious mind. Your words and actions should invite interpretation beyond
imagination died too, and
their surface appearance; you should seem to be dealing not with specific, my world of dreams was
nitty-gritty issues and details but with matters of life and death, love and bare. "
hate, authority and chaos. Your opponent, similarly, should be framed —J. P. MAYER, BRITISH
not merely as an enemy for reasons of ideology or competition but as a vil- CINEMAS AND THEIR
AUDIENCES
lain, a demon. People are hopelessly susceptible to myth, so make yourself
the hero of a great drama. And keep your distance—let people identify
with you without being able to touch you. They can only watch and
dream.

[PAGE 154]
126 • The Art of Seduction
The savage worships idols Jack's life had more to do with myth, magic, legend, saga,
of wood and stone; the and story than with political theory or political science.
civilized man, idols of flesh
and blood. —JACQUELINE KENNEDY, A WEEK AFTER JOHN KENNEDY'S DEATH
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
Keys to the Character
When the eye's rays Seduction is a form of persuasion that seeks to bypass consciousness, stir-
encounter some clear, well-
polished object—be it ring the unconscious mind instead. The reason for this is simple: we are
burnished steel or glass or so surrounded by stimuli that compete for our attention, bombarding us
water, a brilliant stone, or
with obvious messages, and by people who are overtly political and manipu-
any other polished and
lative, that we are rarely charmed or deceived by them. We have grown
gleaming substance
having luster, glitter, and increasingly cynical. Try to persuade a person by appealing to their con-
sparkle . . . those rays of sciousness, by saying outright what you want, by showing all your cards, and
the eye are reflected back,
what hope do you have? You are just one more irritation to be tuned out.
and the observer then
beholds himself and To avoid this fate you must learn the art of insinuation, of reaching the
obtains an ocular vision of unconscious. The most eloquent expression of the unconscious is the
his own person. This is
dream, which is intricately connected to myth; waking from a dream, we
what you see when you
look into a mirror; in that are often haunted by its images and ambiguous messages. Dreams obsess us
situation you are as it were because they mix the real and the unreal. They are filled with real charac-
looking at yourself through
ters, and often deal with real situations, yet they are delightfully irrational,
the eyes of another.
pushing realities to the extremes of delirium. If everything in a dream were
—IBN HAZM, THE RING OF
realistic, it would have no power over us; if everything were unreal, we
THE DOVE:A TREATISE ON THE
ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB would feel less involved in its pleasures and fears. Its fusion of the two is
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A.J. what makes it haunting. This is what Freud called the "uncanny": some-
ARBERRY
thing that seems simultaneously strange and familiar.
We sometimes experience the uncanny in waking life—in a déjà vu, a
miraculous coincidence, a weird event that recalls a childhood experience.
The only important
People can have a similar effect. The gestures, the words, the very being of
constellation of collective
seduction produced by men like Kennedy or Andy Warhol, for example, evoke both the real and
modern times [is] that of the unreal: we may not realize it (and how could we, really), but they are
film stars or cinema
like dream figures to us. They have qualities that anchor them in reality—
idols. . . . They were our
only myth in an age sincerity, playfulness, sensuality—but at the same time their aloofness, their
incapable of generating superiority, their almost surreal quality makes them seem like something
great myths or figures of
out of a movie.
seduction comparable to
those of mythology or art. • These types have a haunting, obsessive effect on people. Whether in
The cinema's power lives in public or in private, they seduce us, making us want to possess them both
its myth. Its stones, its physically and psychologically. But how can we possess a person from a
psychological portraits,
dream, or a movie star or political star, or even one of those real-life fasci-
its imagination or realism,
the meaningful impressions nators, like a Warhol, who may cross our path? Unable to have them, we
it leaves—these are all become obsessed with them—they haunt our thoughts, our dreams, our
secondary. Only the myth
fantasies. We imitate them unconsciously. The psychologist Sandor Fer-
is powerful, and at the
heart of the enczi calls this "introjection": another person becomes part of our ego, we
cinematographic myth lies internalize their character. That is the insidious seductive power of a Star, a
seduction—that of the
power you can appropriate by making yourself into a cipher, a mix of the
renowned seductive figure,
a man or woman (but real and the unreal. Most people are hopelessly banal; that is, far too real.

[PAGE 155]
The Star • 127
What you need to do is etherealize yourself. Your words and actions seem above all a woman) linked
to come from your unconscious—have a certain looseness to them. You to the ravishing but
specious power of the
hold yourself back, occasionally revealing a trait that makes people wonder
cinematographic image
whether they really know you. itself. ...• The star is by
The Star is a creation of modern cinema. That is no surprise: film re- no means an ideal or
sublime being: she is
creates the dream world. We watch a movie in the dark, in a semisomno-
artificial. . . . Her presence
lent state. The images are real enough, and to varying degrees depict
serves to submerge all
realistic situations, but they are projections, flickering lights, images—we sensibility and expression
know they are not real. It as if we were watching someone else's dream. It beneath a ritual fascination
with the void, beneath
was the cinema, not the theater, that created the Star.
ecstasy of her gaze and the
On a theater stage, actors are far away, lost in the crowd, too real in nullity of her smile. This is
their bodily presence. What enabled film to manufacture the Star was the how she achieves mythical
status and becomes subject
close-up, which suddenly separates actors from their contexts, filling your
to collective rites of
mind with their image. The close-up seems to reveal something not sacrificial adulation. • The
so much about the character they are playing but about themselves. We ascension of the cinema
idols, the masses'
glimpse something of Greta Garbo herself when we look so closely into
divinities, was and remains
her face. Never forget this while fashioning yourself as a Star. First, you a central story of modern
must have such a large presence that you can fill your target's mind the way times. . . . There is no
point in dismissing it as
a close-up fills the screen. You must have a style or presence that makes you
merely the dreams of
stand out from everyone else. Be vague and dreamlike, yet not distant or
mystified masses. It is a
absent—you don't want people to be unable to focus on or remember you. seductive occurrence. . . . •
They have to be seeing you in their minds when you're not there. To be sure, seduction in the
age of the masses is no
Second, cultivate a blank, mysterious face, the center that radiates Star-
longer like that of. . . Les
ness. This allows people to read into you whatever they want to, imagining Liaisons Dangereuses or
they can see your character, even your soul. Instead of signaling moods and The Seducer's Diary, nor
for that matter, like that
emotions, instead of emoting or overemoting, the Star draws in interpreta-
found in ancient
tions. That is the obsessive power in the face of Garbo or Dietrich, or even mythology, which
of Kennedy, who molded his expressions on James Dean's. undoubtedly contains the
stories richest in seduction.
A living thing is dynamic and changing while an object or image is pas-
In these seduction is hot,
sive, but in its passivity it stimulates our fantasies. A person can gain that while that of our modern
power by becoming a kind of object. The great eighteenth-century charla- idols is cold, being at the
intersection of two cold
tan Count Saint-Germain was in many ways a precursor of the Star. He
mediums, that of the image
would suddenly appear in town, no one knew from where; he spoke many
and that of the
languages, but his accent belonged to no single country. Nor was it clear masses. ...• The great
how old he was—not young, clearly, but his face had a healthy glow. The stars or seductresses never
dazzle because of their
count only went out at night. He always wore black, and also spectacular
talent or intelligence, but
jewels. Arriving at the court of Louis XV, he was an instant sensation; he because of their absence.
reeked wealth, but no one knew its source. He made the king and Madame They are dazzling in their
nullity, and in their
de Pompadour believe he had fantastic powers, including even the ability to
coldness—the coldness of
turn base matter into gold (the gift of the Philosopher's Stone), but he makeup and ritual
never made any great claims for himself; it was all insinuation. He never hieraticism. . . . • These
great seductive effigies are
said yes or no, only perhaps. He would sit down for dinner but was never
our masks, our Eastern
seen eating. He once gave Madame de Pompadour a gift of candies in a Island statues.
box that changed color and aspect depending on how she held it; this
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
entrancing object, she said, reminded her of the count himself. Saint-
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY
Germain painted the strangest paintings anyone had ever seen—the colors BRIAN SINGER

[PAGE 156]
128 • The Art of Seduction
If you want to know all were so vibrant that when he painted jewels, people thought they were real.
about Andy Warhol, just Painters were desperate to know his secrets but he never revealed them. He
look at the surface of my
would leave town as he had entered, suddenly and quietly. His greatest ad-
paintings and films and
me, and there I am. mirer was Casanova, who met him and never forgot him. When he died,
There's nothing behind it. no one believed it; years, decades, a century later, people were certain he
—ANDY WARHOL, QUOTED IN was hiding somewhere. A person with powers like his never dies.
STEPHEN KOCH, STARGAZER: The count had all the Star qualities. Everything about him was ambigu-
THE LIFE, WORLD & FILMS OF
ous and open to interpretation. Colorful and vibrant, he stood out from the
ANDY WARHOL
crowd. People thought he was immortal, just as a star seems neither to age
nor to disappear. His words were like his presence—fascinating, diverse,
strange, their meaning unclear. Such is the power you can command by
transforming yourself into a glittering object.
Andy Warhol too obsessed everyone who knew him. He had a distinc-
tive style—those silver wigs—and his face was blank and mysterious. People
never knew what he was thinking; like his paintings, he was pure surface.
In the quality of their presence Warhol and Saint-Germain recall the great
trompe l'oeil paintings of the seventeenth century, or the prints of M. C.
Escher—fascinating mixtures of realism and impossibility, which make
people wonder if they are real or imaginary.
A Star must stand out, and this may involve a certain dramatic flair, of
the kind that Dietrich revealed in her appearances at parties. Sometimes,
though, a more haunting, dreamlike effect can be created by subtle touches:
the way you smoke a cigarette, a vocal inflection, a way of walking. It is
often the little things that get under people's skin, and make them imitate
you—the lock of hair over Veronica Lake's right eye, Cary Grant's voice,
Kennedy's ironic smile. Although these nuances may barely register to the
conscious mind, subliminally they can be as attractive as an object with a
striking shape or odd color. Unconsciously we are strangely drawn to
things that have no meaning beyond their fascinating appearance.
Stars make us want to know more about them. You must learn to stir
people's curiosity by letting them glimpse something in your private life,
something that seems to reveal an element of your personality. Let them
fantasize and imagine. A trait that often triggers this reaction is a hint of
spirituality, which can be devilishly seductive, like James Dean's interest in
Eastern philosophy and the occult. Hints of goodness and big-heartedness
can have a similar effect. Stars are like the gods on Mount Olympus, who
live for love and play. The things you love—people, hobbies, animals—
reveal the kind of moral beauty that people like to see in a Star. Exploit this
desire by showing people peeks of your private life, the causes you fight for,
the person you are in love with (for the moment).
Another way Stars seduce is by making us identify with them, giving us
a vicarious thrill. This was what Kennedy did in his press conference about
Truman: in positioning himself as a young man wronged by an older man,
evoking an archetypal generational conflict, he made young people identify
with him. (The popularity in Hollywood movies of the figure of the disaf-
fected, wronged adolescent helped him here.) The key is to represent a

[PAGE 157]
The Star • 129
type, as Jimmy Stewart represented the quintessential middle-American,
Cary Grant the smooth aristocrat. People of your type will gravitate to
you, identify with you, share your joy or pain. The attraction must be un-
conscious, conveyed not in your words but in your pose, your attitude.
Now more than ever, people are insecure, and their identities are in flux.
Help them fix on a role to play in life and they will flock to identify with
you. Simply make your type dramatic, noticeable, and easy to imitate. The
power you have in influencing people's sense of self in this manner is insid-
ious and profound.
Remember: everyone is a public performer. People never know exactly
what you think or feel; they judge you on your appearance. You are an ac-
tor. And the most effective actors have an inner distance: like Dietrich, they
can mold their physical presence as if they perceived it from the outside.
This inner distance fascinates us. Stars are playful about themselves, always
adjusting their image, adapting it to the times. Nothing is more laughable
than an image that was fashionable ten years ago but isn't any more. Stars
must always renew their luster or face the worst possible fate: oblivion.
Symbol: The
Idol. A piece of stone carved into the
shape of a god, perhaps glittering with gold
and jewels. The eyes of the worshippers fill the stone
with life, imagining it to have real powers. Its shape allows
them to see what they want to see—a god—but it is actually
just a piece of stone. The god lives in their imaginations.

[PAGE 158]
130 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Stars create illusions that are pleasurable to see. The danger is that people
tire of them—the illusion no longer fascinates—and turn to another
Star. Let this happen and you will find it very difficult to regain your place
in the galaxy. You must keep all eyes on you at any cost.
Do not worry about notoriety, or about slurs on your image; we are re-
markably forgiving of our Stars. After the death of President Kennedy, all
kinds of unpleasant truths came to light about him—the endless affairs, the
addiction to risk and danger. None of this diminished his appeal, and in
fact the public still considers him one of America's greatest presidents. Errol
Flynn faced many scandals, including a notorious rape case; they only en-
hanced his rakish image. Once people have recognized a Star, any kind of
publicity, even bad, simply feeds the obsession. Of course you can go too
far: people like a Star to have a transcendent beauty, and too much human
frailty will eventually disillusion them. But bad publicity is less of a danger
than disappearing for too long, or growing too distant. You cannot haunt
people's dreams if they never see you. At the same time, you cannot let the
public get too familiar with you, or let your image become predictable.
People will turn against you in an instant if you begin to bore them, for
boredom is the ultimate social evil.
Perhaps the greatest danger Stars face is the endless attention they elicit.
Obsessive attention can become disconcerting and worse. As any attractive
woman can attest, it is tiring to be gazed at all the time, and the effect can
be destructive, as is shown by the story of Marilyn Monroe. The solution is
to develop the kind of distance from yourself that Dietrich had—take the
attention and idolatry with a grain of salt, and maintain a certain detach-
ment from them. Approach your own image playfully. Most important,
never become obsessed with the obsessive quality of people's interest in you.

[PAGE 159]
Se-
ducers draw
you in by the fo-
cused, individualized atten-
tion they pay to you. Anti-Seducers
are the opposite: insecure, self-absorbed,
and unable to grasp the psychology of an-
other person, they literally repel. Anti-
Seducers have no self-awareness, and never
realize when they are pestering, imposing,
talking too much. They lack the subtlety
to create the promise of pleasure that seduc-
tion requires. Root out anti-seductive
qualities in yourself, and recognize them
in others—there is no pleasure or profit
in dealing with the Anti-Seducer.

[PAGE 160]


[PAGE 161]
Typology of the Anti-Seducers
Anti-Seducers come in many shapes and kinds, but almost all of them
share a single attribute, the source of their repellence: insecurity. We
are all insecure, and we suffer for it. Yet we are able to surmount these feel-
ings at times; a seductive engagement can bring us out of our usual self-
absorption, and to the degree that we seduce or are seduced, we feel
charged and confident. Anti-Seducers, however, are insecure to such a de- Count Lodovico then
gree that they cannot be drawn into the seductive process. Their needs, remarked with a smile:
their anxieties, their self-consciousness close them off. They interpret the "I promise you that our
sensible courtier will never
slightest ambiguity on your part as a slight to their ego; they see the merest
act so stupidly to gain a
hint of withdrawal as a betrayal, and are likely to complain bitterly about it. woman's favor." • Cesare
It seems easy: Anti-Seducers repel, so be repelled—avoid them. Unfor- Gonzaga replied: "Nor so
stupidly as a gentleman I
tunately, however, many Anti-Seducers cannot be detected as such at first
remember, of some repute,
glance. They are more subtle, and unless you are careful they will ensnare whom to spare men's
you in a most unsatisfying relationship. You must look for clues to their blushes I don't wish to
mention by name. " •
self-involvement and insecurity: perhaps they are ungenerous, or they argue
"Well, at least tell us what
with unusual tenacity, or are excessively judgmental. Perhaps they lavish he did," said the Duchess.
you with undeserved praise, declaring their love before knowing anything • Then Cesare continued:
"He was loved by a very
about you. Or, most important, they pay no attention to details. Since they
great lady, and at her
cannot see what makes you different, they cannot surprise you with nu- request he came secretly to
anced attention. the town where she was.
After he had seen her and
It is critical to recognize anti-seductive qualities not only in others but
enjoyed her company for as
also in ourselves. Almost all of us have one or two of the Anti-Seducer's
long as she would let him
qualities latent in our character, and to the extent that we can consciously in the time, he sighed and
root them out, we become more seductive. A lack of generosity, for in- wept bitterly, to show the
anguish he was suffering at
stance, need not signal an Anti-Seducer if it is a person's only fault, but an
having to leave her, and he
ungenerous person is seldom truly attractive. Seduction implies opening begged her never to forget
yourself up, even if only for the purposes of deception; being unable to him; and then he added
that she should pay for his
give by spending money usually means being unable to give in general.
lodging at the inn, since it
Stamp ungenerosity out. It is an impediment to power and a gross sin in was she who had sent for
seduction. him and he thought it only
right, therefore, that he
It is best to disengage from Anti-Seducers early on, before they sink
shouldn't be involved in
their needy tentacles into you, so learn to read the signs. These are the any expense over the
main types. journey." • At this, all the
133

[PAGE 162]
134 • The Art of Seduction
ladies began to laugh and The Brute. If seduction is a kind of ceremony or ritual, part of the plea-
to say that the man sure is its duration—the time it takes, the waiting that increases anticipa-
concerned hardly deserved
tion. Brutes have no patience for such things; they are concerned only with
the name of gentleman;
their own pleasure, never with yours. To be patient is to show that you are
and many of the men felt
as ashamed as he should thinking of the other person, which never fails to impress. Impatience has
have been, had he ever had the opposite effect: assuming you are so interested in them you have no rea-
the sense to recognize such
son to wait, Brutes offend you with their egotism. Underneath that ego-
disgraceful behavior for
what it was. tism, too, there is often a gnawing sense of inferiority, and if you spurn
them or make them wait, they overreact. If you suspect you are dealing
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE,
THE BOOK OF THE COURTIER, with a Brute, do a test—make that person wait. His or her response will tell
TRANSLATED BY GEORGE BULL you everything you need to know.
Let us see now how love is The Suffocator. Suffocators fall in love with you before you are even half-
diminished. This happens
aware of their existence. The trait is deceptive—you might think they have
through the easy
accessibility of its found you overwhelming—but the fact is they suffer from an inner void, a
consolations, through one's deep well of need that cannot be filled. Never get involved with Suffoca-
being able to see and
tors; they are almost impossible to free yourself from without trauma. They
converse lengthily with a
cling to you until you are forced to pull back, whereupon they smother you
lover, through a lover's
unsuitable garb and gait, with guilt. We tend to idealize a loved one, but love takes time to develop.
and by the sudden onset of Recognize Suffocators by how quickly they adore you. To be so admired
poverty. . . . • Another
may give a momentary boost to your ego, but deep inside you sense that
cause of diminution of love
is the realization of the their intense emotions are not related to anything you have done. Trust
notoriety of one's lover, and these instincts.
accounts of his miserliness,
A subvariant of the Suffocator is the Doormat, a person who slavishly
bad character, and general
wickedness; also any affair imitates you. Spot these types early on by seeing whether they are capable
with another woman, even of having an idea of their own. An inability to disagree with you is a bad
if it involves no feelings of
sign.
love. Love is also
diminished if a woman
realizes that her lover is
foolish and undiscerning, or The Moralizer. Seduction is a game, and should be undertaken with a
if she sees him going too far
light heart. All is fair in love and seduction; morality never enters the pic-
in demands of love, giving
no thought to his partner's ture. The character of the Moralizer, however, is rigid. These are people
modesty nor wishing to who follow fixed ideas and try to make you bend to their standards. They
pardon her blushes. A
want to change you, to make you a better person, so they endlessly criticize
faithful lover ought to
choose the harshest pains of and judge—that is their pleasure in life. In truth, their moral ideas stem
love rather than by his from their own unhappiness, and mask their desire to dominate those
demands cause his partner
around them. Their inability to adapt and to enjoy makes them easy to rec-
embarrassment, or take
pleasure in spurning her ognize; their mental rigidity may also be accompanied by a physical stiff-
modesty; for one who ness. It is hard not to take their criticisms personally so it is better to avoid
thinks only of the outcome
their presence and their poisoned comments.
of his own pleasure, and
ignores the welfare of his
partner, should be called a
traitor rather than a lover. • The Tightwad. Cheapness signals more than a problem with money. It is a
Love also suffers decrease if
sign of something constricted in a person's character—something that
the woman realizes that
her lover is fearful in war, keeps them from letting go or taking a risk. It is the most anti-seductive

[PAGE 163]
The Anti-Seducer • 135
trait of all, and you cannot allow yourself to give in to it. Most tightwads or sees that he has no
do not realize they have a problem; they actually imagine that when they patience, or is stained with
the vice of pride. There is
give someone some paltry crumb, they are being generous. Take a hard
nothing which appears
look at yourself—you are probably cheaper than you think. Try giving
more appropriate to the
more freely of both your money and yourself and you will see the seduc- character of any lover than
tive potential in selective generosity. Of course you must keep your gener- to be clad in the adornment
of humility, utterly
osity under control. Giving too much can be a sign of desperation, as if
untouched by the
you were trying to buy someone. nakedness of pride. • Then
too the prolixity of a fool
or a madman often
diminishes love. There arc
The Bumbler. Bumblers are self-conscious, and their self-consciousness many keen to prolong their
heightens your own. At first you may think they are thinking about you, crazy words in the presence
of a woman, thinking that
and so much so that it makes them awkward. In fact they are only thinking
they please her if they
of themselves—worrying about how they look, or about the consequences
employ foolish, ill-judged
for them of their attempt to seduce you. Their worry is usually contagious: language, but in fact they
soon you are worrying too, about yourself. Bumblers rarely reach the final are strangely deceived.
Indeed, he who thinks that
stages of a seduction, but if they get that far, they bungle that too. In se-
his foolish behavior pleases
duction, the key weapon is boldness, refusing the target the time to stop a wise woman suffers from
and think. Bumblers have no sense of timing. You might find it amusing the greatest poverty of
sense.
to try to train or educate them, but if they are still Bumblers past a certain
age, the case is probably hopeless—they are incapable of getting outside —ANDREAS CAPELLANUS,"HOW
LOVE IS DIMINISHED,"
themselves.
TRANSLATED BY P. G.WALSH
The Windbag. The most effective seductions are driven by looks, indirect
Real men \ Shouldn't
actions, physical lures. Words have a place, but too much talk will generally primp their good
break the spell, heightening surface differences and weighing things down. looks. . . . \ Keep
pleasantly clean, take
People who talk a lot most often talk about themselves. They have never
exercise, work up an
acquired that inner voice that wonders, Am I boring you? To be a Windbag
outdoor \ Tan; make quite
is to have a deep-rooted selfishness. Never interrupt or argue with these sure that your toga fits \
types—that only fuels their windbaggery. At all costs learn to control your And doesn't show spots;
don't lace your shoes too
own tongue.
tightly \ Or ignore any
rusty buckles, or slop \
Around in too large a
fitting. Don't let some
The Reactor. Reactors are far too sensitive, not to you but to their own
incompetent barber \ Ruin
egos. They comb your every word and action for signs of a slight to their your looks: both hair and
vanity. If you strategically back off, as you sometimes must in seduction, beard demand \ Expert
attention. Keep your nails
they will brood and lash out at you. They are prone to whining and com-
pared, and dirt-free; \
plaining, two very anti-seductive traits. Test them by telling a gentle joke or
Don't let those long hairs
story at their expense: we should all be able to laugh at ourselves a little, but sprout \ In your nostrils,
the Reactor cannot. You can read the resentment in their eyes. Erase any make sure your breath is
never offensive, \ Avoid the
reactive qualities in your own character—they unconsciously repel people.
rank male stench \ That
wrinkles noses. . . . \ I was
about to warn you
[women] against rank
The Vulgarian. Vulgarians are inattentive to the details that are so impor-
goatish armpits \ And
tant in seduction. You can see this in their personal appearance—their bristling hair on your legs, \

[PAGE 164]
136 • The Art of Seduction
But I'm not instructing clothes are tasteless by any standard—and in their actions: they do not
hillbilly girls from the know that it is sometimes better to control oneself and refuse to give in to
Caucasus, \ Or Mysian
one's impulses. Vulgarians will blab, saying anything in public. They have
river-hoydens—so what
need \ To remind you not no sense of timing and are rarely in harmony with your tastes. Indiscretion
to let your teeth get all is a sure sign of the Vulgarian (talking to others of your affair, for example);
discolored \ Through
it may seem impulsive, but its real source is their radical selfishness, their in-
neglect, or forget to wash \
ability to see themselves as others see them. More than just avoiding Vul-
Your hands every morning?
You know how to brighten garians, you must make yourself their opposite—tact, style, and attention to
your complexion \ With detail are all basic requirements of a seducer.
powder, add rouge to a
bloodless face, \ Skillfully
block in the crude outline
of an eyebrow, \ Stick a Examples of the Anti-Seducer
patch on one flawless
cheek. \ You don't shrink
from lining your eyes with 1. Claudius, the step-grandson of the great Roman emperor Augustus, was
dark mascara \ Or a touch considered something of an imbecile as a young man, and was treated badly
of Cilician saffron. . . . \
by almost everyone in his family. His nephew Caligula, who became em-
But don't let your lover
peror in A.D. 37, made it a sport to torture him, making him run around
find all those jars and
bottles \ On your dressing- the palace at top speed as penance for his stupidity, having soiled sandals
table: the best \ Makeup tied to his hands at supper, and so on. As Claudius grew older, he seemed
remains unobtrusive. A
to become even more slow-witted, and while all of his relatives lived under
face so thickly plastered \
With pancake it runs the constant threat of assassination, he was left alone. So it came as a great
down your sweaty neck \ Is surprise to everyone, including Claudius himself, that when, in A.D. 41, a
bound to create repulsion.
cabal of soldiers assassinated Caligula, they also proclaimed Claudius em-
And that goo from
unwashed fleeces— \ peror. Having no desire to rule, he delegated most of the governing to
Athenian maybe, but my confidantes (a group of freed slaves) and spent his time doing what he loved
dear, the smell!— \ That's
best: eating, drinking, gambling, and whoring.
used for face-cream: avoid
it. When you have Claudius's wife, Valeria Messalina, was one of the most beautiful
company \ Don't dab stuff women in Rome. Although he seemed fond of her, Claudius paid her no
on your pimples, don't start
attention, and she started to have affairs. At first she was discreet, but over
cleaning your teeth: \ The
the years, provoked by her husband's neglect, she became more and more
result may be attractive, but
the process is debauched. She had a room built for her in the palace where she enter-
sickening. . . . tained scores of men, doing her best to imitate the most notorious prosti-
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE, tute in Rome, whose name was written on the door. Any man who refused
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN her advances was put to death. Almost everyone in Rome knew about
these frolics, but Claudius said nothing; he seemed oblivious.
So great was Messalina's passion for her favorite lover, Gaius Silius, that
she decided to marry him, although both of them were married already.
While Claudius was away, they held a wedding ceremony, authorized by a
marriage contract that Claudius himself had been tricked into signing. Af-
ter the ceremony, Gaius moved into the palace. Now the shock and disgust
of the whole city finally forced Claudius into action, and he ordered the
execution of Gaius and of Messalina's other lovers—but not of Messalina
herself. Nevertheless, a gang of soldiers, inflamed by the scandal, hunted
her down and stabbed her to death. When this was reported to the em-
peror, he merely ordered more wine and continued his meal. Several nights

[PAGE 165]
The Anti-Seducer • 137
later, to the amazement of his slaves, he asked why the empress was not But if, like the winter cat
joining him for dinner. upon the hearth, the lover
clings when he is
dismissed, and cannot bear
Nothing is more infuriating than being paid no attention. In the process of
to go, certain means must
seduction, you may have to pull back at times, subjecting your target to be taken to make him
moments of doubt. But prolonged inattention will not only break the se- understand; and these
should be progressively
ductive spell, it can create hatred. Claudius was an extreme of this behavior.
ruder and ruder, until they
His insensitivity was created by necessity: in acting like an imbecile, he hid touch him to the quick of
his ambition and protected himself among dangerous competitors. But the his flesh. • She should
refuse him the bed, and
insensitivity became second nature. Claudius grew slovenly, and no longer
jeer at him, and make him
noticed what was going on around him. His inattentiveness had a profound angry; she should stir up
effect on his wife: How, she wondered, can a man, especially a physically her mother's enmity against
him; she should treat him
unappealing man like Claudius, not notice me, or care about my affairs
with an obvious lack of
with other men? But nothing she did seemed to matter to him. candor, and spread herself
Claudius marks the extreme, but the spectrum of inattention is wide. A in long considerations
about his ruin; his
lot of people pay too little attention to the details, the signals another per-
departure should be openly
son gives. Their senses are dulled by work, by hardship, by self-absorption.
anticipated, his tastes and
We often see this turning off the seductive charge between two people, no- desires should be thwarted,
tably between couples who have been together for years. Carried further, it his poverty outraged; she
should let him see that she
will stir angry, bitter feelings. Often, the one who has been cheated on by a
is in sympathy with
partner started the dynamic by patterns of inattention. another man, she should
blame him with harsh
words on every occasion;
she should tell lies about
2. In 1639, a French army besieged and took possession of the Italian city of him to her parasites, she
Turin. Two French officers, the Chevalier (later Count) de Grammont and should interrupt his
sentences, and send him on
his friend Matta, decided to turn their attention to the city's beautiful
frequent errands away from
women. The wives of some of Turin's most illustrious men were more than
the house. She should seek
susceptible—their husbands were busy, and kept mistresses of their own. The occasions of quarrel, and
wives' only requirement was that the suitor play by the rules of gallantry. make him the victim of a
thousand domestic
The chevalier and Matta were quick to find partners, the chevalier
perfidies; she should rack
choosing the beautiful Mademoiselle de Saint-Germain, who was soon to her brains to vex him; she
be betrothed, and Matta offering his services to an older and more experi- should play with the
glances of another in his
enced woman, Madame de Senantes. The chevalier took to wearing green,
presence, and give herself
Matta blue, these being their ladies' favorite colors. On the second day of up to reprehensible
their courtships the couples visited a palace outside the city. The chevalier profligacy before his face;
she should leave the house
was all charm, making Mademoiselle de Saint-Germain laugh uproariously
as often as possible, and let
at his witticisms, but Matta did not fare so well; he had no patience for this it be seen that she has no
gallantry business, and when he and Madame de Senantes took a stroll, he real need to do so. All
these means are good for
squeezed her hand and boldly declared his affections. The lady of course
showing a man the door.
was aghast, and when they got back to Turin she left without looking at
him. Unaware that he had offended her, Matta imagined that she was over- —EASTERN LOVE, VOLUME II:
THE HARLOT'S BREVIARY OF
come with emotion, and felt rather pleased with himself. But the Chevalier KSHEMENDRA, TRANSLATED BY
de Grammont, wondering why the pair had parted, visited Madame de E. POWYS MATHERS
Senantes and asked her how it went. She told him the truth—Matta had
dispensed with the formalities and was ready to bed her. The chevalier

[PAGE 166]
138 • The Art of Seduction
Just as ladies do love men laughed and thought to himself how differently he would manage affairs if
which be valiant and bold he were the one wooing the lovely Madame.
under arms, so likewise do
Over the next few days Matta continued to misread the signs. He did
they love such as be of like
sort in love; and the man not pay a visit to Madame de Senantes's husband, as custom required. He
which is cowardly and over did not wear her colors. When the two went riding together, he went chas-
and above respectful toward
ing after hares, as if they were the more interesting prey, and when he took
them, will never win their
snuff he failed to offer her some. Meanwhile he continued to make his
good favor. Not that they
would have them so overforward advances. Finally Madame had had enough, and complained to
overweening, bold, and him directly. Matta apologized; he had not realized his errors. Moved by his
presumptuous, as that they
apology, the lady was more than ready to resume the courtship—but a few
should by main force lay
them on the floor; but days later, after a few trifling stabs at wooing, Matta once again assumed
rather they desire in them a that she was ready for bed. To his dismay, she refused him as before. "I do
certain hardy modesty, or
not think that [women] can be mightily offended," Matta told the cheva-
perhaps better a certain
modest hardihood. For lier, "if one sometimes leaves off trifling, to come to the point." But
while themselves are not Madame de Senantes would have nothing more to do with him, and the
exactly wantons, and will
Chevalier de Grammont, seeing an opportunity he could not pass by, took
neither solicit a man nor
advantage of her displeasure by secretly courting her properly, and eventu-
yet actually offer their
favors, yet do they know ally winning the favors that Matta had tried to force.
well how to rouse the
appetites and passions, and
There is nothing more anti-seductive than feeling that someone has assumed
prettily allure to the
skirmish in such wise that that you are theirs, that you cannot possibly resist them. The slightest ap-
he which doth not take pearance of this kind of conceit is deadly to seduction; you must prove
occasion by the forelock and
yourself, take your time, win your target's heart. Perhaps you fear that he or
join encounter, and that
without the least awe of she will be offended by a slower pace, or will lose interest. It is more likely,
rank and greatness, without however, that your fear reflects your own insecurity, and insecurity is always
a scruple of conscience or a
anti-seductive. In truth, the longer you take, the more you show the depth
fear or any sort of
of your interest, and the deeper the spell you create.
hesitation, he verily is a
fool and a spiritless In a world of few formalities and ceremony, seduction is one of the few
poltroon, and one which remnants from the past that retains the ancient patterns. It is a ritual, and its
doth merit to be forever
rites must be observed. Haste reveals not the depth of your feelings but the
abandoned of kind fortune.
• I have heard of two degree of your self-absorption. It may be possible sometimes to hurry
honorable gentlemen and someone into love, but you will only be repaid by the lack of pleasure this
comrades, for the which two
kind of love affords. If you are naturally impetuous, do what you can to
very honorable ladies, and
of by no means humble disguise it. Strangely enough, the effort you spend on holding yourself
quality, made tryst one day back may be read by your target as deeply seductive.
at Paris to go walking in a
garden. Being come thither,
each lady did separate
apart one from the other, 3. In Paris in the 1730s lived a young man named Meilcour, who was just
each alone with her own of an age to have his first affair. His mother's friend Madame de Lursay, a
cavalier, each in a several
widow of around forty, was beautiful and charming, but had a reputation
alley of the garden, that
was so close covered in with for being untouchable; as a boy, Meilcour had been infatuated with her, but
a fair trellis of boughs as never expected his love would be returned. So it was with great surprise
that daylight could really
and excitement that he realized that now that he was old enough, Madame
scarce penetrate there at all,
and the coolness of the de Lursay's tender looks seemed to indicate a more than motherly interest
place was very grateful. in him.

[PAGE 167]
The Anti-Seducer • 139
For two months Meilcour trembled in de Lursay's presence. He was Now one of the twain was
afraid of her, and did not know what to do. One evening they were dis- a bold man, and well
knowing how the party
cussing a recent play. How well one character had declared his love to a
had been made for
woman, Madame remarked. Noting Meilcour's obvious discomfort, she
something else than merely
went on, "If I am not mistaken, a declaration can only seem such an em- to walk and take the air,
barrassing matter because you yourself have one to make." Madame de and judging by his lady's
face, which he saw to be all
Lursay knew full well that she was the source of the young man's awkward-
a-fire, that she had
ness, but she was a tease; you must tell me, she said, with whom you are in longings to taste other fare
love. Finally Meilcour confessed: it was indeed Madame whom he desired. than the muscatels that
hung on the trellis, as also
His mother's friend advised him to not think of her that way, but she also
by her hot, wanton, and
sighed, and gave him a long and languid look. Her words said one thing, wild speech, he did
her eyes another—perhaps she was not as untouchable as he had thought. promptly seize on so fair
an opportunity. So catching
As the evening ended, though, Madame de Lursay said she doubted his
hold of her without the
feelings would last, and she left young Meilcour troubled that she had said least ceremony, he did lay
nothing about reciprocating his love. her on a little couch that
was there made of turf and
Over the next few days, Meilcour repeatedly asked de Lursay to declare
clods of earth, and did very
her love for him, and she repeatedly refused. Eventually the young man de-
pleasantly work his will of
cided his cause was hopeless, and gave up; but a few nights later, at a soiree her, without her ever
at her house, her dress seemed more enticing than usual, and her looks at uttering a word but only:
"Heavens! Sir, what are
him stirred his blood. He returned them, and followed her around, while
you at? Surely you be the
she took care to keep a bit of distance, lest others sense what was happen- maddest and strangest
ing. Yet she also managed to arrange that he could stay without arousing fellow ever was! If anyone
comes, whatever will they
suspicion when the other visitors left.
say? Great heavens! get
When they were finally alone, she made him sit beside her on the sofa. out!" But the gentleman,
He could barely speak; the silence was uncomfortable. To get him talking without disturbing himself,
did so well continue what
she raised the same old subject: his youth would make his love for her a
he had begun that he did
passing fancy. Instead of denying it he looked dejected, and continued to finish, and she to boot,
keep a polite distance, so that she finally exclaimed, with obvious irony, "If with such content as that
after taking three or four
it were known that you were here with my consent, that I had voluntarily
turns up and down the
arranged it with you . . . what might not people say? And yet how wrong
alley, they did presently
they would be, for no one could be more respectful than you are." Goaded start afresh. Anon, coming
into action, Meilcour grabbed her hand and looked her in the eye. She forth into another, open,
alley, they did see in
blushed and told him he should go, but the way she arranged herself on the
another part of the garden
sofa and looked back at him suggested he should do the opposite. Yet Meil- the other pair, who were
cour still hesitated: she had told him to go, and if he disobeyed she might walking about together just
as they had left them at
cause a scene, and might never forgive him; he would have made a fool of
first. Whereupon the lady,
himself, and everyone, including his mother, would hear of it. He soon got well content, did say to the
up, apologizing for his momentary boldness. Her astonished and somewhat gentleman in the like
condition, "I verily believe
cold look meant he had indeed gone too far, he imagined, and he said
so and so hath played the
goodbye and left.
silly prude, and hath given
his lady no other
entertainment but only
Meilcour and Madame de Lursay appear in the novel The Wayward Head
words, fine speeches, and
and Heart, written in 1738 by Crébillon fils, who based his characters on
promenading." • Afterward
libertines he knew in the France of the time. For Crébillon fils, seduction is when all four were come
all about signs—about being able to send them and read them. This is not together, the two ladies did
fall to asking one another

[PAGE 168]
140 • The Art of Seduction
how it had fared with each. because sexuality is repressed and requires speaking in code. It is rather be-
Then the one which was cause wordless communication (through clothes, gestures, actions) is the
well content did reply she
most pleasurable, exciting, and seductive form of language.
was exceeding well, indeed
she was; indeed for the In Crébillon fils's novel, Madame de Lursay is an ingenious seductress
nonce she could scarce be who finds it exciting to initiate young men. But even she cannot overcome
better. The other, which
the youthful stupidity of Meilcour, who is incapable of reading her signs
was ill content, did declare
because he is absorbed in his own thoughts. Later in the story, she does
for her part she had had to
do with the biggest fool and manage to educate him, but in real life there are many who cannot be
most coward lover she had educated. They are too literal and insensitive to the details that contain
ever seen; and all the time
seductive power. They do not so much repel as irritate and infuriate you
the two gentlemen could
see them laughing together by their constant misinterpretations, always viewing life from behind
as they walked and crying the screen of their ego and unable to see things as they really are. Meilcour
out: "Oh! the silly fool!
is so caught up in himself he cannot see that Madame is expecting him to
the shamefaced poltroon
and coward!" At this the make the bold move to which she will have to succumb. His hesitation
successful gallant said to his shows that he is thinking of himself, not of her; that he is worrying about
companion: "Hark to our
how he will look, not feeling overwhelmed by her charms. Nothing could
ladies, which do cry out at
be more anti-seductive. Recognize such types, and if they are past the
you, and mock you sore.
You will find you have young age that would give them an excuse, do not entangle yourself in
overplayed the prude and their awkwardness—they will infect you with doubt.
coxcomb this bout." So
much he did allow; but
there was no more time to
remedy his error, for 4. In the Heian court of late-tenth-century Japan, the young nobleman
opportunity gave him
Kaoru, purported son of the great seducer Genji himself, had had nothing
no other handle to seize
her by. but misfortune in love. He had become infatuated with a young princess,
Oigimi, who lived in a dilapidated home in the countryside, her father
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT having fallen on hard times. Then one day he had an encounter with
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.. Oigimi's sister, Nakanokimi, that convinced him she was the one he actu-
ALLINSON
ally loved. Confused, he returned to court, and did not visit the sisters for
some time. Then their father died, followed shortly thereafter by Oigimi
herself.
Now Kaoru realized his mistake: he had loved Oigimi all along, and she
had died out of despair that he did not care for her. He would never meet
her like again; she was all he could think about. When Nakanokimi, her fa-
ther and sister dead, came to live at court, Kaoru had the house where
Oigimi and her family had lived turned into a shrine.
One day, Nakanokimi, seeing the melancholy into which Kaoru had
fallen, told him that there was a third sister, Ukifune, who resembled his
beloved Oigimi and lived hidden away in the countryside. Kaoru came to
life—perhaps he had a chance to redeem himself, to change the past. But
how could he meet this woman? There came a time when he visited the
shrine to pay his respects to the departed Oigimi, and heard that the myste-
rious Ukifune was there as well. Agitated and excited, he managed to catch
a glimpse of her through the crack in a door. The sight of her took his
breath away: although she was a plain-looking country girl, in Kaoru's eyes
she was the living incarnation of Oigimi. Her voice, meanwhile, was like

[PAGE 169]
The Anti-Seducer • 141
the voice of Nakanokimi, whom he had loved as well. Tears welled up in
his eyes.
A few months later Kaoru managed to find the house in the mountains
where Ukifune lived. He visited her there, and she did not disappoint. "I
once had a glimpse of you through a crack in a door," he told her, and
"you have been very much on my mind ever since." Then he picked her up
in his arms and carried her to a waiting carriage. He was taking her back to
the shrine, and the journey there brought back to him the image of
Oigimi; again his eyes clouded with tears. Looking at Ukifune, he silently
compared her to Oigimi—her clothes were less nice but she had beautiful
hair.
When Oigimi was alive, she and Kaoru had played the koto together,
so once at the shrine he had kotos brought out. Ukifune did not play as
well as Oigimi had, and her manners were less refined. Not to worry—he
would give her lessons, change her into a lady. But then, as he had done
with Oigimi, Kaoru returned to court, leaving Ukifune languishing at the
shrine. Some time passed before he visited her again; she had improved,
was more beautiful than before, but he could not stop thinking of Oigimi.
Once again he left her, promising to bring her to court, but more weeks
passed, and finally he received the news that Ukifune had disappeared, last
seen heading toward a river. She had most likely committed suicide.
At the funeral ceremony for Ukifune, Kaoru was wracked with guilt:
why had he not come for her earlier? She deserved a better fate.
Kaoru and the others appear in the eleventh-century Japanese novel The
Tale of Genji, by the noblewoman Murasaki Shikibu. The characters are
based on people the author knew, but Kaoru's type appears in every culture
and period: these are men and women who seem to be searching for an
ideal partner. The one they have is never quite right; at first glance a person
excites them, but they soon see faults, and when a new person crosses their
path, he or she looks better and the first person is forgotten. These types
often try to work on the imperfect mortal who has excited them, to im-
prove them culturally and morally. But this proves extremely unsatisfactory
for both parties.
The truth about this type is not that they are searching for an ideal
but that they are hopelessly unhappy with themselves. You may mistake
their dissatisfaction for a perfectionist's high standards, but in point of fact
nothing will really satisfy them, for their unhappiness is deep-rooted. You
can recognize them by their past, which will be littered with short-lived,
stormy romances. Also, they will tend to compare you to others, and to try
to remake you. You may not realize at first what you have gotten into, but
people like this will eventually prove hopelessly anti-seductive because they
cannot see your individual qualities. Cut the romance off before it happens.
These types are closet sadists and will torture you with their unreachable
goals.

[PAGE 170]
142 • The Art of Seduction
5. In 1762, in the city of Turin, Italy, Giovanni Giacomo Casanova made
the acquaintance of one Count A.B., a Milanese gentleman who seemed to
like him enormously. The count had fallen on hard times and Casanova
lent him some money. In gratitude, the count invited Casanova to stay with
him and his wife in Milan. His wife, he said, was from Barcelona, and was
admired far and wide for her beauty. He showed Casanova her letters,
which had an intriguing wit; Casanova imagined her as a prize worth se-
ducing. He went to Milan.
Arriving at the house of Count A.B., Casanova found that the Spanish
lady was certainly beautiful, but that she was also quiet and serious. Some-
thing about her bothered him. As he was unpacking his clothes, the count-
ess saw a stunning red dress, trimmed with sable, among his belongings. It
was a gift, Casanova explained, for any Milanese lady who won his heart.
The following evening at dinner, the countess was suddenly more
friendly, teasing and bantering with Casanova. She described the dress as a
bribe—he would use it to persuade a woman to give in to him. On the
contrary, said Casanova, he only gave gifts afterward, as tokens of his appre-
ciation. That evening, in a carriage on the way back from the opera, she
asked him if a wealthy friend of hers could buy the dress, and when he said
no, she was clearly vexed. Sensing her game, Casanova offered to give her
the sable dress if she was kind to him. This only made her angry, and they
quarreled.
Finally Casanova had had enough of the countess's moods: he sold the
dress for 15,000 francs to her wealthy friend, who in turn gave it to her, as
she had planned all along. But to prove his lack of interest in money,
Casanova told the countess he would give her the 15,000 francs, no strings
attached. "You are a very bad man," she said, "but you can stay, you amuse
me." She resumed her coquettish manner, but Casanova was not fooled. "It
is not my fault, madame, if your charms have so little power over me," he
told her. "Here are 15,000 francs to console you." He laid the money on a
table and walked out, leaving the countess fuming and vowing revenge.
When Casanova first met the Spanish lady, two things about her repelled
him. First, her pride: rather than engaging in the give-and-take of seduc-
tion, she demanded a man's subjugation. Pride can reflect self-assurance,
signaling that you will not abase yourself before others. Just as often,
though, it stems from an inferiority complex, which demands that others
abase themselves before you. Seduction requires an openness to the other
person, a willingness to bend and adapt. Excessive pride, without anything
to justify it, is highly anti-seductive.
The second quality that disgusted Casanova was the countess's greed:
her coquettish little games were designed only to get the dress—she had no
interest in romance. For Casanova, seduction was a lighthearted game that
people played for their mutual amusement. In his scheme of things, it was
fine if a woman wanted money and gifts as well; he could understand that
desire, and he was a generous man. But he also felt that this was a desire a

[PAGE 171]
The Anti-Seducer • 143
woman should disguise—she should create the impression that what she
was after was pleasure. The person who is obviously angling for money or
other material reward can only repel. If that is your intention, if you are
looking for something other than pleasure—for money, for power—never
show it. The suspicion of an ulterior motive is anti-seductive. Never let
anything break the illusion.
6. In 1868, Queen Victoria of England hosted her first private meeting
with the country's new prime minister, William Gladstone. She had met
him before, and knew his reputation as a moral absolutist, but this was to be
a ceremony, an exchange of pleasantries. Gladstone, however, had no pa-
tience for such things. At that first meeting he explained to the queen his
theory of royalty: the queen, he believed, had to play an exemplary role
in England—a role she had lately failed to live up to, for she was overly
private.
This lecture set a bad tone for the future, and things only got worse:
soon Victoria was receiving letters from Gladstone, addressing the subject
in even greater depth. Half of them she never bothered to read, and soon
she was doing everything she could to avoid contact with the leader of her
government; if she had to see him, she made the meeting as brief as possi-
ble. To that end, she never allowed him to sit down in her presence, hoping
that a man his age would soon tire and leave. For once he got going on a
subject dear to his heart, he did not notice your look of disinterest or the
tears in your eyes from yawning. His memoranda on even the simplest of
issues would have to be translated into plain English for her by a member of
her staff. Worst of all, Gladstone argued with her, and his arguments had a
way of making her feel stupid. She soon learned to nod her head and ap-
pear to agree with whatever abstract point he was trying to make. In a let-
ter to her secretary, referring to herself in the third person, she wrote, "She
always felt in [Gladstone's] manner an overbearing obstinacy and imperi-
ousness . . . which she never experienced from anyone else, and which she
found most disagreeable." Over the years, these feelings hardened into an
unwaning hatred.
As the head of the Liberal Party, Gladstone had a nemesis, Benjamin
Disraeli, the head of the Conservative Party. He considered Disraeli amoral,
a devilish Jew. At one session of Parliament, Gladstone tore into his rival,
scoring point after point as he described where his opponents policies
would lead. Growing angry as he spoke (as usually happened when he
talked of Disraeli), he pounded the speaker's table with such force that pens
and papers went flying. Through all of this Disraeli seemed half-asleep.
When Gladstone had finished, he opened his eyes, rose to his feet, and
calmly walked up to the table. "The right honorable gentleman," he said,
"has spoken with much passion, much eloquence, and much—ahem—
violence." Then, after a drawn-out pause, he continued, "But the damage
can be repaired"—and he proceeded to gather up everything that had fallen

[PAGE 172]
144 • The Art of Seduction
from the table and put them back in place. The speech that followed was all
the more masterful for its calm and ironic contrast to Gladstone's. The
members of Parliament were spellbound, and all of them agreed he had
won the day.
If Disraeli was the consummate social seducer and charmer, Gladstone was
the Anti-Seducer. Of course he had supporters, mostly among the more
puritanical elements of society—he twice defeated Disraeli in a general
election. But he found it hard to broaden his appeal beyond the circle of
believers. Women in particular found him insufferable. Of course they had
no vote at the time, so they were little political liability; but Gladstone had
no patience for a feminine point of view. A woman, he felt, had to learn to
see things as a man did, and it was his purpose in life to educate those he
felt were irrational or abandoned by God.
It did not take long for Gladstone to wear on anyone's nerves. That is
the nature of people who are convinced of some truth, but have no pa-
tience for a different perspective or for dealing with someone else's psy-
chology. These types are bullies, and in the short term they often get their
way, particularly among the less aggressive. But they stir up a lot of resent-
ment and unspoken antipathy, which eventually trips them up. People see
through their righteous moral stance, which is most often a cover for a
power play—morality is a form of power. A seducer never seeks to per-
suade directly, never parades his or her morality, never lectures or imposes.
Everything is subtle, psychological, and indirect.
Symbol: The
Crab. In a harsh world, the crab sur-
vives by its hardened shell, by the threat of its
pincers, and by burrowing into the sand. No one dares
get too close. But the Crab cannot surprise its enemy and has
little mobility. Its defensive strength is its supreme limitation.

[PAGE 173]
The Anti-Seducer • 145
Uses of Anti-Seduction
The best way to avoid entanglements with Anti-Seducers is to recognize
them right away and give them a wide berth, but they often deceive
us. Involvements with these types are painful, and are hard to disengage
from, because the more emotional response you show, the more engaged
you seem to be. Do not get angry—that may only encourage them or
exacerbate their anti-seductive tendencies. Instead, act distant and indiffer-
ent, pay no attention to them, make them feel how little they matter to
you. The best antidote to an Anti-Seducer is often to be anti-seductive
yourself.
Cleopatra had a devastating effect on every man who crossed her path.
Octavius—the future Emperor Augustus, and the man who would de-
feat and destroy Cleopatra's lover Mark Antony—was well aware of her
power, and defended himself against it by being always extremely amiable
with her, courteous to the extreme, but never showing the slightest emo-
tion, whether of interest or dislike. In other words, he treated her as if she
were any other woman. Facing this front, she could not sink her hooks into
him. Octavius made anti-seduction his defense against the most irresistible
woman in history. Remember: seduction is a game of attention, of slowly
filling the other person's mind with your presence. Distance and inattention
will create the opposite effect, and can be used as a tactic when the need
arises.
Finally, if you really want to "anti-seduce," simply feign the qualities
listed at the beginning of the chapter. Nag; talk a lot, particularly about
yourself; dress against the other person's tastes; pay no attention to detail;
suffocate, and so on. A word of warning: with the arguing type, the Wind-
bag, never talk back too much. Words will only fan the flames. Adopt the
Queen Victoria strategy: nod, seem to agree, then find an excuse to cut the
conversation short. This is the only defense.

[PAGE 174]


[PAGE 175]
The Eighteen Types
The people around you are all potential victims of a
seduction, but first you must know what type of vic-
tim you are dealing with. Victims are categorized
by what they feel they are missing in life—ad-
venture, attention, romance, a naughty expe-
rience, mental or physical stimulation, etc.
Once you identify their type, you have
the necessary ingredients for a seduc-
tion: you will be the one to give
them what they lack and cannot
get on their own. In studying
potential victims, learn to see
the reality behind the ap-
pearance. A timid person
may yearn to play the
star; a prude may
long for a trans-
gressive thrill.
Never try to
seduce your
own type.
o o o
o o
o

[PAGE 176]


[PAGE 177]
Victim Theory
Nobody in this world feels whole and complete. We all sense some gap
in our character, something we need or want but cannot get on our
own. When we fall in love, it is often with someone who seems to fill that
gap. The process is usually unconscious and depends on luck: we wait for
the right person to cross our path, and when we fall for them we hope they
return our love. But the seducer does not leave such things to chance.
Look at the people around you. Forget their social exterior, their obvi-
ous character traits; look behind all of that, focusing on the gaps, the miss-
ing pieces in their psyche. That is the raw material of any seduction. Pay
close attention to their clothes, their gestures, their offhand comments, the
things in their house, certain looks in their eyes; get them to talk about
their past, particularly past romances. And slowly the outline of those miss-
ing pieces will come into view. Understand: people are constantly giving
out signals as to what they lack. They long for completeness, whether the
illusion of it or the reality, and if it has to come from another person, that
person has tremendous power over them. We may call them victims of a
seduction, but they are almost always willing victims.
This chapter outlines the eighteen types of victims, each one of which
has a dominant lack. Although your target may well reveal the qualities of
more than one type, there is usually a common need that ties them to-
gether. Perhaps you see someone as both a New Prude and a Crushed Star,
but what is common to both is a feeling of repression, and therefore a de-
sire to be naughty, along with a fear of not being able or daring enough. In
identifying your victim's type, be careful to not be taken in by outward ap-
pearances. Both deliberately and unconsciously, we often develop a social
exterior designed specifically to disguise our weaknesses and lacks. For in-
stance, you may think you are dealing with someone who is tough and
cynical, without realizing that deep inside they have a soft sentimental core.
They secretly pine for romance. And unless you identify their type and the
emotions beneath their toughness, you lose the chance to truly seduce
them. Most important: expunge the nasty habit of thinking that other peo-
ple have the same lacks you do. You may crave comfort and security, but in
giving comfort and security to someone else, on the assumption they must
want them as well, you are more likely smothering and pushing them away.
Never try to seduce someone who is of your own type. You will be like
two puzzles missing the same parts.
149

[PAGE 178]
150 • The Art of Seduction
The Eighteen Types
The Reformed Rake or Siren. People of this type were once happy-go-
lucky seducers who had their way with the opposite sex. But the day came
when they were forced to give this up—someone corraled them into a rela-
tionship, they were encountering too much social hostility, they were get-
ting older and decided to settle down. Whatever the reason, you can be
sure they feel some resentment and a sense of loss, as if a limb were miss-
ing. We are always trying to recapture pleasures we experienced in the past,
but the temptation is particularly great for the Reformed Rake or Siren be-
cause the pleasures they found in seduction were intense. These types are
ripe for the picking: all that is required is that you cross their path and offer
them the opportunity to resume their rakish or siren ways. Their blood will
stir and the call of their youth will overwhelm them.
It is critical, though, to give these types the illusion that they are the
ones doing the seducing. With the Reformed Rake, you must spark his in-
terest indirectly, then let him burn and glow with desire. With the Re-
formed Siren, you want to give her the impression that she still has the
irresistible power to draw a man in and make him give up everything for
her. Remember that what you are offering these types is not another rela-
tionship, another constriction, but rather the chance to escape the corral
and have some ran. Do not be put off if they are in a relationship; a preex-
isting commitment is often the perfect foil. If hooking them into a rela-
tionship is what you want, hide it as best you can and realize it may not be
possible. The Rake or Siren is unfaithful by nature; your ability to spark the
old feeling gives you power, but then you will have to live with the conse-
quences of their feckless ways.
The Disappointed Dreamer. As children, these types probably spent a lot
of time alone. To entertain themselves they developed a powerful fantasy
life, fed by books and films and other kinds of popular culture. And as they
get older, it becomes increasingly difficult to reconcile their fantasy life
with reality, and so they are often disappointed by what they get. This is
particularly true in relationships. They have been dreaming of romantic he-
roes, of danger and excitement, but what they have is lovers with human
frailties, the petty weaknesses of everyday life. As the years pass, they may
force themselves to compromise, because otherwise they would have to
spend their lives alone; but beneath the surface they are bitter and still hun-
gering for something grand and romantic.
You can recognize this type by the books they read and films they go to,
the way their ears prick up when told of the real-life adventures some peo-
ple manage to live out. In their clothes and home furnishings, a taste for
exuberant romance or drama will peek through. They are often trapped in
drab relationships, and little comments here and there will reveal their dis-
appointment and inner tension.

[PAGE 179]
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 151
These types make for excellent and satisfying victims. First, they usually
have a great deal of pent-up passion and energy, which you can release and
focus on yourself. They also have great imaginations and will respond to
anything vaguely mysterious or romantic that you offer them. All you need
do is disguise some of your less than exalted qualities and give them a part
of their dream. This could be the chance to live out their adventures or be
courted by a chivalrous soul. If you give them a part of what they want
they will imagine the rest. At all cost, do not let reality break the illusion
you are creating. One moment of pettiness and they will be gone, more
bitterly disappointed than ever.
The Pampered Royal. These people were the classic spoiled children. All
of their wants and desires were met by an adoring parent—endless enter-
tainments, a parade of toys, whatever kept them happy for a day or two.
Where many children learn to entertain themselves, inventing games and
finding friends, Pampered Royals are taught that others will do the enter-
taining for them. Being spoiled, they get lazy, and as they get older and the
parent is no longer there to pamper them, they tend to feel quite bored and
restless. Their solution is to find pleasure in variety, to move quickly from
person to person, job to job, or place to place before boredom sets in. They
do not settle into relationships well because habit and routine of some kind
are inevitable in such affairs. But their ceaseless search for variety is tiring
for them and comes with a price: work problems, strings of unsatisfying ro-
mances, friends scattered across the globe. Do not mistake their restlessness
and infidelity for reality—what the Pampered Prince or Princess is really
looking for is one person, that parental figure, who will give them the
spoiling they crave.
To seduce this type, be ready to provide a lot of distraction—new
places to visit, novel experiences, color, spectacle. You will have to main-
tain an air of mystery, continually surprising your target with a new side to
your character. Variety is the key. Once Pampered Royals are hooked,
things get easier for they will quickly grow dependent on you and you can
put out less effort. Unless their childhood pampering has made them too
difficult and lazy, these types make excellent victims——they will be as loyal
to you as they once were to mommy or daddy. But you will have to do
much of the work. If you are after a long relationship, disguise it. Offer
long-term security to a Pampered Royal and you will induce a panicked
flight. Recognize these types by the turmoil in their past—job changes,
travel, short-term relationships—and by the air of aristocracy, no matter
their social class, that comes from once being treated like royalty.
The New Prude. Sexual prudery still exists, but it is less common than it
was. Prudery, however, is never just about sex; a prude is someone who is
excessively concerned with appearances, with what society considers ap-

[PAGE 180]
152 • The Art of Seduction
propriate and acceptable behavior. Prudes rigorously stay within the bounda-
ries of correctness because more than anything they fear society's judg-
ment. Seen in this light, prudery is just as prevalent as it always was.
The New Prude is excessively concerned with standards of goodness,
fairness, political sensitivity, tastefulness, etc. What marks the New Prude,
though, as well as the old one, is that deep down they are actually excited
and intrigued by guilty, transgressive pleasures. Frightened by this attrac-
tion, they run in the opposite direction and become the most correct of all.
They tend to wear drab colors; they certainly never take fashion risks. They
can be very judgmental and critical of people who do take risks and are less
correct. They are also addicted to routine, which gives them a way to tamp
down their inner turmoil.
New Prudes are secretly oppressed by their correctness and long to
transgress. Just as sexual prudes make prime targets for a Rake or Siren, the
New Prude will often be most tempted by someone with a dangerous or
naughty side. If you desire a New Prude, do not be taken in by their judg-
ments of you or their criticisms. That is only a sign of how deeply you fas-
cinate them; you are on their mind. You can often draw a New Prude into
a seduction, in fact, by giving them the chance to criticize you or even try
to reform you. Take nothing of what they say to heart, of course, but now
you have the perfect excuse to spend time with them—and New Prudes
can be seduced simply through being in contact with you. These types ac-
tually make excellent and rewarding victims. Once you open them up and
get them to let go of their correctness, they are flooded with feelings and
energies. They may even overwhelm you. Perhaps they are in a relationship
with someone as drab as they themselves seem to be—do not be put off.
They are simply asleep, waiting to be awakened.
The Crushed Star. We all want attention, we all want to shine, but with
most of us these desires are fleeting and easily quieted. The problem with
Crushed Stars is that at one point in their lives they did find themselves the
center of attention—perhaps they were beautiful, charming and efferves-
cent, perhaps they were athletes, or had some other talent—but those days
are gone. They may seem to have accepted this, but the memory of having
once shone is hard to get over. In general, the appearance of wanting atten-
tion, of trying to stand out, is not seen too kindly in polite society or in the
workplace. So to get along, Crushed Stars learn to tamp down their desires;
but failing to get the attention they feel they deserve, they also become re-
sentful. You can recognize Crushed Stars by certain unguarded moments:
they suddenly receive some attention in a social setting, and it makes them
glow; they mention their glory days, and there is a little glint in the eye; a
little wine in the system, and they become effervescent.
Seducing this type is simple: just make them the center of attention.
When you are with them, act as if they were stars and you were basking in
their glow. Get them to talk, particularly about themselves. In social situa-

[PAGE 181]
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 153
tions, mute your own colors and let them look funny and radiant by com-
parison. In general, play the Charmer. The reward of seducing Crushed
Stars is that you stir up powerful emotions. They will feel intensely grateful
to you for letting them shine. To whatever extent they had felt crushed and
bottled up, the easing of that pain releases intensity and passion, all directed
at you. They will fall madly in love. If you yourself have any star or dandy
tendencies it is wise to avoid such victims. Sooner or later those tendencies
will come out, and the competition between you will be ugly.
The Novice. What separates Novices from ordinary innocent young peo-
ple is that they are fatally curious. They have little or no experience of the
world, but have been exposed to it secondhand—in newspapers, films,
books. Finding their innocence a burden, they long to be initiated into the
ways of the world. Everyone sees them as so sweet and innocent, but they
know this isn't so—they cannot be as angelic as people think them.
Seducing a Novice is easy. To do it well, however, requires a bit of art.
Novices are interested in people with experience, particularly people with
a touch of corruption and evil. Make that touch too strong, though, and it
will intimidate and frighten them. What works best with a Novice is a mix
of qualities. You are somewhat childlike yourself, with a playful spirit. At
the same time, it is clear that you have hidden depths, even sinister ones.
(This was the secret of Lord Byron's success with so many innocent
women.) You are initiating your Novices not just sexually but experien-
tially, exposing them to new ideas, taking them to new places, new worlds
both literal and metaphoric. Do not make your seduction ugly or seedy—
everything must be romantic, even including the evil and dark side of life.
Young people have their ideals; it is best to initiate them with an aesthetic
touch. Seductive language works wonders on Novices, as does attention to
detail. Spectacles and colorful events appeal to their sensitive senses. They
are easily misled by these tactics, because they lack the experience to see
through them.
Sometimes Novices are a little older and have been at least somewhat
educated in the ways of the world. Yet they put on a show of innocence,
for they see the power it has over older people. These are coy Novices,
aware of the game they are playing—but Novices they remain. They may
be less easily misled than purer Novices, but the way to seduce them is
pretty much the same—mix innocence and corruption and you will fasci-
nate them.
The Conqueror. These types have an unusual amount of energy, which
they find difficult to control. They are always on the prowl for people to
conquer, obstacles to surmount. You will not always recognize Conquerors
by their exterior—they can seem a little shy in social situations and can
have a degree of reserve. Look not at their words or appearance but at their

[PAGE 182]
154 • The Art of Seduction
actions, in work and in relationships. They love power, and by hook or by
crook they get it.
Conquerors tend to be emotional, but their emotion only comes out in
outbursts, when pushed. In matters of romance, the worst thing you can do
with them is lie down and make yourself easy prey; they may take advan-
tage of your weakness, but they will quickly discard you and leave you the
worse for wear. You want to give Conquerors a chance to be aggressive, to
overcome some resistance or obstacle, before letting them think they have
overwhelmed you. You want to give them a good chase. Being a little diffi-
cult or moody, using coquetry, will often do the trick. Do not be intimi-
dated by their aggressiveness and energy—that is precisely what you can
turn to your advantage. To break them in, keep them charging back and
forth like a bull. Eventually they will grow weak and dependent, as
Napoleon became the slave of Josephine.
The Conqueror is generally male but there are plenty of female Con-
querors out there—Lou Andreas-Salomé and Natalie Barney are famous
ones. Female Conquerors will succumb to coquetry, though, just as the
male ones will.
The Exotic Fetishist. Most of us are excited and intrigued by the exotic.
What separates Exotic Fetishists from the rest of us is the degree of this in-
terest, which seems to govern all their choices in life. In truth they feel
empty inside and have a strong dose of self-loathing. They do not like
wherever it is they come from, their social class (usually middle or upper),
and their culture because they do not like themselves.
These types are easy to recognize. They like to travel; their houses are
filled with objets from faraway places; they fetishize the music or art of this
or that foreign culture. They often have a strong rebellious streak. Clearly
the way to seduce them is to position yourself as exotic—if you do not at
least appear to come from a different background or race, or to have some
alien aura, you should not even bother. But it is always possible to play up
what makes you exotic, to make it a kind of theater for their amusement.
Your clothes, the things you talk about, the places you take them, make a
show of your difference. Exaggerate a little and they will imagine the rest,
because such types tend to be self-deluders. Exotic Fetishists, however, do
not make particularly good victims. Whatever exoticism you have will soon
seem banal to them, and they will want something else. It will be a struggle
to hold their interest. Their underlying insecurity will also keep you on
edge.
One variation on this type is the man or woman who is trapped in a
stultifying relationship, a banal occupation, a dead-end town. It is circum-
stance, as opposed to personal neurosis, that makes such people fetishize the
exotic; and these Exotic Fetishists are better victims than the self-loathing
kind, because you can offer them a temporary escape from whatever op-

[PAGE 183]
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 155
presses them. Nothing, however, will offer true Exotic Fetishists escape
from themselves.
The Drama Queen. There are people who cannot do without some con-
stant drama in their lives—it is their way of deflecting boredom. The great-
est mistake you can make in seducing these Drama Queens is to come
offering stability and security. That will only make them run for the hills.
Most often, Drama Queens (and there are plenty of men in this category)
enjoy playing the victim. They want something to complain about, they
want pain. Pain is a source of pleasure for them. With this type, you have to
be willing and able to give them the mental rough treatment they desire.
That is the only way to seduce them in a deep manner. The moment you
turn too nice, they will find some reason to quarrel or get rid of you.
You will recognize Drama Queens by the number of people who have
hurt them, the tragedies and traumas that have befallen them. At the ex-
treme, they can be hopelessly selfish and anti-seductive, but most of them
are relatively harmless and will make fine victims if you can live with the
sturm und drang. If for some reason you want something long term with
this type, you will constantly have to inject drama into your relationship.
For some this can be an exciting challenge and a source for constantly re-
newing the relationship. Generally, however, you should see an involve-
ment with a Drama Queen as something fleeting and a way to bring a little
drama into your own life.
The Professor. These types cannot get out of the trap of analyzing and
criticizing everything that crosses their path. Their minds are overdevel-
oped and overstimulated. Even when they talk about love or sex, it is with
great thought and analysis. Having developed their minds at the expense of
their bodies, many of them feel physically inferior and compensate by lord-
ing their mental superiority over others. Their conversation is often wry or
ironic—you never quite know what they are saying, but you sense them
looking down on you. They would like to escape their mental prisons, they
would like pure physicality, without any analysis, but they cannot get there
on their own. Professor types sometimes engage in relationships with other
professor types, or with people they can treat as inferiors. But deep down
they long to be overwhelmed by someone with physical presence—a Rake
or a Siren, for instance.
Professors can make excellent victims, for underneath their intellectual
strength lie gnawing insecurities. Make them feel like Don Juans or Sirens,
to even the slightest degree, and they are your slaves. Many of them have a
masochistic streak that will come out once you stir their dormant senses.
You are offering an escape from the mind, so make it as complete as possi-
ble: if you have intellectual tendencies yourself, hide them. They will only

[PAGE 184]
156 • The Art of Seduction
stir your target's competitive juices and get their minds turning. Let your
Professors keep their sense of mental superiority; let them judge you. You
will know what they will try to hide: that you are the one in control, for
you are giving them what no one else can give them—physical stimulation.
The Beauty. From early on in life, the Beauty is gazed at by others. Their
desire to look at her is the source of her power, but also the source of much
unhappiness: she constantly worries that her powers are waning, that she
is no longer attracting attention. If she is honest with herself, she also
senses that being worshiped only for one's appearance is monotonous and
unsatisfying—and lonely. Many men are intimidated by beauty and prefer
to worship it from afar; others are drawn in, but not for the purpose of
conversation. The Beauty suffers from isolation.
Because she has so many lacks, the Beauty is relatively easy to seduce,
and if done right, you will have won not only a much prized catch but
someone who will grow dependent on what you provide. Most important
in this seduction is to validate those parts of the Beauty that no one else
appreciates—her intelligence (generally higher than people imagine), her
skills, her character. Of course you must worship her body—you cannot
stir up any insecurities in the one area in which she knows her strength, and
the strength on which she most depends—but you also must worship her
mind and soul. Intellectual stimulation will work well on the Beauty, dis-
tracting her from her doubts and insecurities, and making it seem that you
value that side of her personality.
Because the Beauty is always being looked at, she tends to be passive.
Beneath her passivity, though, there often lies frustration: the Beauty would
love to be more active and to actually do some chasing of her own. A little
coquettishness can work well here: at some point in all your worshiping,
you might go a little cold, inviting her to come after you. Train her to be
more active and you will have an excellent victim. The only downside is
that her many insecurities require constant attention and care.
The Aging Baby. Some people refuse to grow up. Perhaps they are afraid
of death or of growing old; perhaps they are passionately attached to the
life they led as children. Disliking responsibility, they struggle to turn
everything into play and recreation. In their twenties they can be charming,
in their thirties interesting, but by the time they reach their forties they are
beginning to wear thin.
Contrary to what you might imagine, one Aging Baby does not want
to be involved with another Aging Baby, even though the combination
might seem to increase the chances for play and frivolity. The Aging Baby
does not want competition, but an adult figure. If you desire to seduce this
type, you must be prepared to be the responsible, staid one. That may be a

[PAGE 185]
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 157
strange way of seducing, but in this case it works. You should appear to like
the Aging Baby's youthful spirit (it helps if you actually do), can engage
with it, but you remain the indulgent adult. By being responsible you free
the Baby to play. Act the loving adult to the hilt, never judging or criticiz-
ing their behavior, and a strong attachment will form. Aging Babies can be
amusing for a while, but, like all children, they are often potently narcissis-
tic. This limits the pleasure you can have with them. You should see them
as short-term amusements or temporary outlets for your frustrated parental
instincts.
The Rescuer. We are often drawn to people who seem vulnerable or
weak—their sadness or depression can actually be quite seductive. There
are people, however, who take this much further, who seem to be attracted
only to people with problems. This may seem noble, but Rescuers usually
have complicated motives: they often have sensitive natures and truly want
to help. At the same time, solving people's problems gives them a kind of
power they relish—it makes them feel superior and in control. It is also the
perfect way to distract them from their own problems. You will recognize
these types by their empathy—they listen well and try to get you to open
up and talk. You will also notice they have histories of relationships with
dependent and troubled people.
Rescuers can make excellent victims, particularly if you enjoy chival-
rous or maternal attention. If you are a woman, play the damsel in distress,
giving a man the chance so many men long for—to act the knight. If you
are a man, play the boy who cannot deal with this harsh world; a female
Rescuer will envelop you in maternal attention, gaining for herself the
added satisfaction of feeling more powerful and in control than a man. An
air of sadness will draw either gender in. Exaggerate your weaknesses, but
not through overt words or gestures—let them sense that you have had too
little love, that you have had a string of bad relationships, that you have got-
ten a raw deal in life. Having lured your Rescuer in with the chance to help
you, you can then stoke the relationship's fires with a steady supply of
needs and vulnerabilities. You can also invite moral rescue: you are bad.
You have done bad things. You need a stern yet loving hand. In this case
the Rescuer gets to feel morally superior, but also the vicarious thrill of in-
volvement with someone naughty.
The Roué. These types have lived the good life and experienced many
pleasures. They probably have, or once had, a good deal of money to fi-
nance their hedonistic lives. On the outside they tend to seem cynical and
jaded, but their worldliness often hides a sentimentality that they have
struggled to repress. Roués are consummate seducers, but there is one type
that can easily seduce them—the young and the innocent. As they get

[PAGE 186]
158 • The Art of Seduction
older, they hanker after their lost youth; missing their long-lost innocence,
they begin to covet it in others.
If you should want to seduce them, you will probably have to be some-
what young and to have retained at least the appearance of innocence. It is
easy to play this up—make a show of how little experience you have in the
world, how you still see things as a child. It is also good to seem to resist
their advances: Roués will think it lively and exciting to chase you. You can
even seem to dislike or distrust them—that will really spur them on. By be-
ing the one who resists, you control the dynamic. And since you have the
youth that they are missing, you can maintain the upper hand and make
them fall deeply in love. They will often be susceptible to such a fall, be-
cause they have tamped down their own romantic tendencies for so long
that when it bursts forth, they lose control. Never give in too early, and
never let your guard down—such types can be dangerous.
The Idol Worshiper. Everyone feels an inner lack, but Idol Worshipers
have a bigger emptiness than most people. They cannot be satisfied with
themselves, so they search the world for something to worship, something
to fill their inner void. This often assumes the form of a great interest in
spiritual matters or in some worthwhile cause; by focusing on something
supposedly elevated, they distract themselves from their own void, from
what they dislike about themselves. Idol Worshipers are easy to spot—they
are the ones pouring their energies into some cause or religion. They often
move around over the years, leaving one cult for another.
The way to seduce these types is to simply become their object of wor-
ship, to take the place of the cause or religion to which they are so dedi-
cated. At first you may have to seem to share their spiritual interest, joining
them in their worship, or perhaps exposing them to a new cause; eventually
you will displace it. With this type you have to hide your flaws, or at least
to give them a saintly sheen. Be banal and Idol Worshipers will pass you by.
But mirror the qualities they aspire to have for themselves and they will
slowly transfer their adoration to you. Keep everything on an elevated
plane—let romance and religion flow into one.
Keep two things in mind when seducing this type. First, they tend to
have overactive minds, which can make them quite suspicious. Because
they often lack physical stimulation, and because physical stimulation will
distract them, give them some: a mountain trek, a boat trip, or sex will do
the trick. But this takes a lot of work, for their minds are always ticking.
Second, they often suffer from low self-esteem. Do not try to raise
it; they will see through you, and your efforts at praising them will clash
with their own self-image. They are to worship you; you are not to wor-
ship them. Idol Worshipers make perfectly adequate victims in the short
term, but their endless need to search will eventually lead them to look for
something new to adore.

[PAGE 187]
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 159
The Sensualist. What marks these types is not their love of pleasure
but their overactive senses. Sometimes they show this quality in their
appearance—their interest in fashion, color, style. But sometimes it is
more subtle: because they are so sensitive, they are often quite shy, and
they will shrink from standing out or being flamboyant. You will recog-
nize them by how responsive they are to their environment, how they
cannot stand a room without sunlight, are depressed by certain colors, or
excited by certain smells. They happen to live in a culture that deempha-
sizes sensual experience (except perhaps for the sense of sight). And so
what the Sensualist lacks is precisely enough sensual experiences to appre-
ciate and relish.
The key to seducing them is to aim for their senses, to take them to
beautiful places, pay attention to detail, envelop them in spectacle, and of
course use plenty of physical lures. Sensualists, like animals, can be baited
with colors and smells. Appeal to as many senses as possible, keeping your
targets distracted and weak. Seductions of Sensualists are often easy and
quick, and you can use the same tactics again and again to keep them inter-
ested, although it is wise to vary your sensual appeals somewhat, in kind if
not in quality. That is how Cleopatra worked on Mark Antony, an inveter-
ate Sensualist. These types make superb victims because they are relatively
docile if you give them what they want.
The Lonely Leader. Powerful people are not necessarily different from
everyone else, but they are treated differently, and this has a big effect on
their personalities. Everyone around them tends to be fawning and
courtierlike, to have an angle, to want something from them. This makes
them suspicious and distrustful, and a little hard around the edges, but do
not mistake the appearance for the reality: Lonely Leaders long to be se-
duced, to have someone break through their isolation and overwhelm
them. The problem is that most people are too intimidated to try, or use
the kind of tactics—flattery, charm—that they see through and despise. To
seduce such types, it is better to act like their equal or even their superior—
the kind of treatment they never get. If you are blunt with them you will
seem genuine, and they will be touched—you care enough to be honest,
even perhaps at some risk. (Being blunt with the powerful can be danger-
ous.) Lonely Leaders can be made emotional by inflicting some pain, fol-
lowed by tenderness.
This is one of the hardest types to seduce, not only because they are
suspicious but because their minds are burdened with cares and responsi-
bilities. They have less mental space for a seduction. You will have to be pa-
tient and clever, slowly filling their minds with thoughts of you. Succeed,
though, and you can gain great power in turn, for in their loneliness they
will come to depend on you.

[PAGE 188]
160 • The Art of Seduction
The Floating Gender. All of us have a mix of the masculine and the
feminine in our characters, but most of us learn to develop and exhibit the
socially acceptable side while repressing the other. People of the Floating
Gender type feel that the separation of the sexes into such distinct genders
is a burden. They are sometimes thought to be repressed or latent homo-
sexuals, but this is a misunderstanding: they may well be heterosexual but
their masculine and feminine sides are in flux, and because this may dis-
comfit others if they show it, they learn to repress it, perhaps by going to
one extreme. They would actually love to be able to play with their gender,
to give full expression to both sides. Many people fall into this type without
its being obvious: a woman may have a masculine energy, a man a devel-
oped aesthetic side. Do not look for obvious signs, because these types
often go underground, keeping it under wraps. This makes them vulnera-
ble to a powerful seduction.
What Floating Gender types are really looking for is another person of
uncertain gender, their counterpart from the opposite sex. Show them that
in your presence and they can relax, express the repressed side of their char-
acter. If you have such proclivities, this is the one instance where it would
be best to seduce the same type of the opposite sex. Each person will stir
up repressed desires in the other and will suddenly have license to explore
all kinds of gender combinations, without fear of judgment. If you are not
of the Floating Gender, leave this type alone. You will only inhibit them
and create more discomfort.

[PAGE 189]


[PAGE 190]


[PAGE 191]
Most of us understand that certain actions on our part will have a
pleasing and seductive effect on the person we would like to seduce.
The problem is that we are generally too self-absorbed: We think more
about what we want from others than what they could want from us. We
may occasionally do something that is seductive, but often we follow this
up a with a selfish or aggressive action (we are in a hurry to get what we
want); or, unaware of what we are doing, we show a side of ourselves that
is petty and banal, deflating any illusions or fantasies a person might have
about us. Our attempts at seduction usually do not last long enough to cre-
ate much of an effect.
You will not seduce anyone by simply depending on your engaging
personality, or by occasionally doing something noble or alluring. Seduc-
tion is a process that occurs over time—the longer you take and the slower
you go, the deeper you will penetrate into the mind of your victim. It is an
art that requires patience, focus, and strategic thinking. You need to always
be one step ahead of your victim, throwing dust in their eyes, casting a
spell, keeping them off balance.
The twenty-four chapters in this section will arm you with a series of
tactics that will help you get out of yourself and into the mind of your vic-
tim, so that you can play it like an instrument. The chapters are placed
in a loose order, going from the initial contact with your victim to the suc-
cessful conclusion. This order is based on certain timeless laws of human
psychology. Because people's thoughts tend to revolve around their daily
concerns and insecurities, you cannot proceed with a seduction until
you slowly put their anxieties to sleep and fill their distracted minds with
thoughts of you. The opening chapters will help you accomplish this.
There is a natural tendency in relationships for people to become so famil-
iar with one another that boredom and stagnation set in. Mystery is the
lifeblood of seduction and to maintain it you have to constantly surprise
your victims, stir things up, even shock them. A seduction should never set-
tle into a comfortable routine. The middle and later chapters will instruct
you in the art of alternating hope and despair, pleasure and pain, until your
victims weaken and succumb. In each instance, one tactic is setting up the
next one, allowing you to push it further with something bolder and more
violent. A seducer cannot be timid or merciful.
To help you move the seduction along, the chapters are arranged in
163

[PAGE 192]
164 • The Art of Seduction
four phases, each phase with a particular goal to aim for: getting the victim
to think of you; gaining access to their emotions by creating moments of
pleasure and confusion; going deeper by working on their unconscious,
stirring up repressed desires; and finally, inducing physical surrender. (The
phases are clearly marked and explained with a short introduction.) By fol-
lowing these phases you will work more effectively on your victim's mind
and create the slow and hypnotic pace of a ritual. In fact, the seductive
process may be thought of as a kind of initiation ritual, in which you are
uprooting people from their habits, giving them novel experiences, putting
them through tests, before initiating them into a new life.
It is best to read all of the chapters and gain as much knowledge as pos-
sible. When it comes time to apply these tactics, you will want to pick and
choose which ones are appropriate for your particular victim; sometimes
only a few are sufficient, depending on the level of resistance you meet and
the complexity of your victim's problems. These tactics are equally applica-
ble to social and political seductions, minus the sexual component in Phase
Four.
At all cost, resist the temptation to hurry to the climax of your seduc-
tion, or to improvise. You are not being seductive but selfish. Everything in
daily life is hurried and improvised, and you need to offer something differ-
ent. By taking your time and respecting the seductive process you will not
only break down your victim's resistance, you will make them fall in love.

[PAGE 193]
Phase One
Separation—
Stirring Interest and Desire
Your victims live in their own worlds, their minds occupied with
anxieties and daily concerns. Your goal in this initial phase is to
slowly separate them from that closed world and fill their minds
with thoughts of you. Once you have decided whom to seduce
(1: Choose the right victim), your first task is to get your vic-
tims' attention, to stir interest in you. For those who might be
more resistant or difficult, you should try a slower and more in-
sidious approach, first winning their friendship (2: Create a
false sense of security—approach indirectly); for those who are
bored and less difficult to reach, a more dramatic approach will
work, either fascinating them with a mysterious presence (3:
Send mixed signals) or seeming to be someone who is coveted
and fought over by others (4: Appear to be an object of desire).
Once the victim is properly intrigued, you need to transform
their interest into something stronger—desire. Desire is generally
preceded by feelings of emptiness, of something missing inside
that needs fulfillment. You must deliberately instill such feelings,
make your victims aware of the adventure and romance that are
lacking in their lives (5: Create a need—stir anxiety and dis-
content). If they see you as the one to fill their emptiness, inter-
est will blossom into desire. The desire should be stoked by
subtly planting ideas in their minds, hints of the seductive plea-
sures that await them (6: Master the art of insinuation). Mir-
roring your victims' values, indulging them in their wants and
moods will charm and delight them (7: Enter their spirit).
Without realizing how it has happened, more and more of their
thoughts now revolve around you. The time has come for some-
thing stronger. Lure them with an irresistible pleasure or adven-
ture (8: Create temptation) and they will follow your lead.

[PAGE 194]


[PAGE 195]
Choose the Right Victim
Everything de-
pends on the target of your seduc-
tion. Study your prey thoroughly, and choose
only those who will prove susceptible to your
charms. The right victims are those for whom you can fill
a void, who see in you something exotic. They are often
isolated or at least somewhat unhappy (perhaps because of re-
cent adverse circumstances), or can easily be made so—for the
completely contented person is almost impossible to seduce.
The perfect victim has some natural quality that attracts
you. The strong emotions this quality inspires will
help make your seductive maneuvers seem more
natural and dynamic. The perfect victim
allows for the perfect chase.

[PAGE 196]


[PAGE 197]
Preparing for the Hunt
The young Vicomte de Valmont was a notorious libertine in the Paris of
the 1770s, the ruin of many a young girl and the ingenious seducer of
the wives of illustrious aristocrats. But after a while the repetitiveness of it
all began to bore him; his successes came too easily So one year, during the
sweltering, slow month of August, he decided to take a break from Paris
and visit his aunt at her château in the provinces. Life there was not what
The ninth • Have I
he was used to—there were country walks, chats with the local vicar, card become blind? Has the
games. His city friends, particularly his fellow libertine and confidante the inner eye of the soul lost its
power? I have seen her, but
Marquise de Merteuil, expected him to hurry back.
it is as if I had seen a
There were other guests at the château, however, including the Prési- heavenly revelation—so
dente de Tourvel, a twenty-two-year-old woman whose husband was tem- completely has her image
vanished again for me. In
porarily absent, having work to do elsewhere. The Présidente had been
vain do I summon all the
languishing at the château, waiting for him to join her. Valmont had met powers of my soul in order
her before; she was certainly beautiful, but had a reputation as a prude who to conjure up this image. If
I ever see her again, I shall
was extremely devoted to her husband. She was not a court lady; her taste
be able to recognize her
in clothing was atrocious (she always covered her neck with ghastly frills) instantly, even though she
and her conversation lacked wit. For some reason, however, far from Paris, stands among a hundred
others. Now she has fled,
Valmont began to see these traits in a new light. He followed her to the
and the eye of my soul tries
chapel where she went every morning to pray. He caught glimpses of her at
in vain to overtake her
dinner, or playing cards. Unlike the ladies of Paris, she seemed unaware of with its longing. I was
her charms; this excited him. Because of the heat, she wore a simple linen walking along Langelinie,
seemingly nonchalantly
dress, which revealed her figure. A piece of muslin covered her breasts, let-
and without paying
ting him more than imagine them. Her hair, unfashionable in its slight dis- attention to my
order, conjured the bedroom. And her face—he had never noticed how surroundings, although my
reconnoitering glance left-
expressive it was. Her features lit up when she gave alms to a beggar; she
nothing unobserved—and
blushed at the slightest praise. She was so natural and unself-conscious. And then my eyes fell upon her.
when she talked of her husband, or religious matters, he could sense the My eyes fixed
unswervingly upon her.
depth of her feelings. If such a passionate nature were ever detoured into a
They no longer obeyed
love affair. . . .
their master's will; it was
Valmont extended his stay at the château, much to the delight of his impossible for me to shift
my gaze and thus overlook
aunt, who could not have guessed at the reason. And he wrote to the Mar-
the object I wanted to
quise de Merteuil, explaining his new ambition: to seduce Madame de
see—I did not look, I
Tourvel. The Marquise was incredulous. He wanted to seduce this prude? stared. As a fencer freezes
If he succeeded, how little pleasure she would give him, and if he failed, in his lunge, so my eyes
were fixed, petrified in the
what a disgrace—the great libertine unable to seduce a wife whose husband
direction initially taken. It
was far away! She wrote a sarcastic letter, which only inflamed Valmont fur- was impossible to look
169

[PAGE 198]
170 • The Art of Seduction
down, impossible to ther. The conquest of this notoriously virtuous woman would prove his
withdraw my glance, greatest seduction. His reputation would only be enhanced.
impossible to see, because I
There was an obstacle, though, that seemed to make success almost im-
saw far too much. The
only thing I have retained possible: everyone knew Valmont's reputation, including the Présidente.
is that she had on a green She knew how dangerous it was to ever be alone with him, how people
cloak, that is all—one
would talk about the least association with him. Valmont did everything
could call it capturing the
to belie his reputation, even going so far as to attend church services and
cloud instead of Juno; she
has escaped me . . .and seem repentant of his ways. The Présidente noticed, but still kept her dis-
left only her cloak tance. The challenge she presented to Valmont was irresistible, but could he
behind. . . . The girl made
meet it?
an impression on me. •
The sixteenth • . . . I feel Valmont decided to test the waters. One day he arranged a little walk
no impatience, for she must with the Présidente and his aunt. He chose a delightful path that they had
live here in the city, and at
never taken before, but at a certain point they reached a little ditch, unsuit-
this moment that is enough
for me. This possibility is able for a lady to cross on her own. And yet, Valmont said, the rest of the
the condition for the proper walk was too nice for them to turn back, and he gallantly picked up his
appearance of her image—
aunt in his arms and carried her across the ditch, making the Présidente
everything
laugh uproariously. But then it was her turn, and Valmont purposefully
will be enjoyed in slow
drafts. . . . • The picked her up a little awkwardly, so that she caught at his arms, and while
nineteenth • Cordelia, he was holding her against him he could feel her heart beating faster, and
then, is her name!
saw her blush. His aunt saw this too, and cried out, "The child is afraid!"
Cordelia! It is a beautiful
name, and that, too, is But Valmont sensed otherwise. Now he knew that the challenge could be
important, since it can met, that the Présidente could be won. The seduction could proceed.
often be very disturbing to
have to name an ugly
name together with the
most tender adjectives. Interpretation. Valmont, the Présidente de Tourvel, and the Marquise de
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE Merteuil are all characters in the eighteenth-century French novel Danger-
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED ous Liaisons, by Choderlos de Laclos. (The character of Valmont was in-
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
spired by several real-life libertines of the time, most prominent of all the
EDNA H. HONG
Duke de Richelieu.) In the story, Valmont worries that his seductions have
become mechanical; he makes a move, and the woman almost always re-
sponds the same way. But no two seductions should be the same—a differ-
Love as understood by
ent target should change the whole dynamic. Valmont's problem is that he
Don Juan is a feeling akin
to a taste for hunting. It is is always seducing the same type—the wrong type. He realizes this when he
a craving for an activity meets Madame de Tourvel.
which needs an incessant
It is not because her husband is a count that he decides to seduce her,
diversity of stimuli to
challenge skill. or because she is stylishly dressed, or is desired by other men—the usual
reasons. He chooses her because, in her unconscious way, she has already
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND seduced him. A bare arm, an unrehearsed laugh, a playful manner—all
SUZANNE SALE these have captured his attention, because none of them is contrived. Once
he falls under her spell, the strength of his desire will make his subsequent
maneuvers seem less calculated; he is apparently unable to help himself.
It is not the quality of the And his strong emotions will slowly infect her.
desired object that gives us
Beyond the effect the Présidente has on Valmont, she has other traits
pleasure, but rather the
that make her the perfect victim. She is bored, which draws her toward ad-
energy of our appetites.
venture. She is naive, and unable to see through his tricks. Finally, the
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE
END OF DON JUAN Achilles' heel: she believes herself immune to seduction. Almost all of us

[PAGE 199]
Choose the Right Victim • 171
are vulnerable to the attractions of other people, and we take precautions The daughter of desire
against unwanted lapses. Madame de Tourvel takes none. Once Valmont should strive to have the
following lovers in their
has tested her at the ditch, and has seen she is physically vulnerable, he
turn, as being mutually
knows that eventually she will fall.
restful to her: a boy who
Life is short, and should not be wasted pursuing and seducing the has been loosed too soon
wrong people. The choice of target is critical; it is the set up of the seduc- from the authority and
counsel of his father, an
tion and it will determine everything else that follows. The perfect victim
author enjoying office with
does not have certain facial features, or the same taste in music, or similar a rather simple-minded
goals in life. That is how a banal seducer chooses his or her targets. The prince, a merchant's son
whose pride is in rivaling
perfect victim is the person who stirs you in a way that cannot be explained
other lovers, an ascetic who
in words, whose effect on you has nothing to do with superficialities. He or is the slave of love in
she often has a quality that you yourself lack, and may even secretly envy— secret, a king's son whose
follies are boundless and
the Présidente, for example, has an innocence that Valmont long ago lost or
who has a taste for rascals,
never had. There should be a little bit of tension—the victim may fear you the countrified son of some
a little, even slightly dislike you. Such tension is full of erotic potential and village Brahman, a
married woman's lover, a
will make the seduction much livelier. Be more creative in choosing your
singer who has just
prey and you will be rewarded with a more exciting seduction. Of course,
pocketed a very large sum
it means nothing if the potential victim is not open to your influence. Test of money, the master of a
the person first. Once you feel that he or she is also vulnerable to you then caravan but recently come
in. . . .These brief
the hunting can begin.
instructions admit of
infinitely varied
It is a stroke of good fortune to find one who is worth se- interpretation, dear child,
according to the
ducing. . . . Most people rush ahead, become engaged or do
circumstance; and it
other stupid things, and in a turn of the hand everything is
requires intelligence, insight
over, and they know neither what they have won nor what and reflection to make the
they have lost. best of each particular case.
—EASTERN LOVE, VOLUME II:
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
THE HARLOT'S BREVIARY OF
KSHEMENDRA, TRANSLATED BY
E. POWYS MATHERS
Keys to Seduction
Throughout life we find ourselves having to persuade people—to se-
The women who can
duce them. Some will be relatively open to our influence, if only in be easily won over to
subtle ways, while others seem impervious to our charms. Perhaps we find congress: . . . a woman
who looks sideways at
this a mystery beyond our control, but that is an ineffective way of dealing
you; . . . a woman who
with life. Seducers, whether sexual or social, prefer to pick the odds. As
hates her husband, or who
often as possible they go toward people who betray some vulnerability to is hated by him; . . . a
them, and avoid the ones who cannot be moved. To leave people who are woman who has not had
any children; . . . a
inaccessible to you alone is a wise path; you cannot seduce everyone. On the
woman who is very fond of
other hand, you must actively hunt out the prey that responds the right way. society; a woman who
This will make your seductions that much more pleasurable and satisfying. is apparently very
affectionate toward her
How do you recognize your victims? By the way they respond to you.
husband; the wife of an
You should not pay so much attention to their conscious responses—a per- actor; a widow; . . . a
son who is obviously trying to please or charm you is probably playing to woman fond of
enjoyments; . . . a vain
your vanity, and wants something from you. Instead, pay greater attention
woman; a woman whose
to those responses outside conscious control—a blush, an involuntary mir- husband is inferior to her

[PAGE 200]
172 • The Art of Seduction
in rank or ability; a roring of some gesture of yours, an unusual shyness, even perhaps a flash of
woman who is proud of her anger or resentment. All of these show that you are having an effect on a
skill in the arts; . . . a
person who is open to your influence.
woman who is slighted by
Like Valmont, you can also recognize the right targets by the effect they
her husband without any
cause; . . . a woman whose are having on you. Perhaps they make you uneasy—perhaps they corre-
husband is devoted to spond to a deep-rooted childhood ideal, or represent some kind of personal
travelling; the wife of a
taboo that excites you, or suggest the person you imagine you would be if
jeweler; a jealous woman;
a covetous woman. you were the opposite sex. When a person has such a deep effect on you, it
transforms all of your subsequent maneuvers. Your face and gestures be-
—THE HINDI: ART OF LOVE,
EDITED BY EDWARD WINDSOR come more animated. You have more energy; when victims resist you (as a
good victim should) you in turn will be more creative, more motivated to
overcome their resistance. The seduction will move forward like a good
Leisure stimulates love, play. Your strong desire will infect the target and give them the dangerous
leisure watches the
sensation that they have a power over you. Of course, you are the one ulti-
lovelorn, \ Leisure's the
mately in control since you are making your victims emotional at the right
cause and sustenance of
this sweet \ Evil. moments, leading them back and forth. Good seducers choose targets that
Eliminate leisure, and inspire them but they know how and when to restrain themselves.
Cupid's bow is broken, \
Never rush into the waiting arms of the first person who seems to like
His torches lie lightless,
scorned. \ As a plane-tree you. That is not seduction but insecurity. The need that draws you will
rejoices in wine, as a poplar make for a low-level attachment, and interest on both sides will sag. Look
in water, \ As a marsh-reed
at the types you have not considered before—that is where you will find
in swampy ground, so
Venus loves \ Leisure. . . . challenge and adventure. Experienced hunters do not choose their prey by
\ Why do you think how easily it is caught; they want the thrill of the chase, a life-and-death
Aegisthus \ Became an
struggle—the fiercer the better.
adulterer? Easy: he was
idle—and bored. \ Although the victim who is perfect for you depends on you, certain
Everyone else was away at types lend themselves to a more satisfying seduction. Casanova liked young
Troy on a lengthy \ women who were unhappy, or had suffered a recent misfortune. Such
Campaign: all Greece had
women appealed to his desire to play the savior, but it also responded to ne-
shipped \ Its contingent
across. Suppose he cessity: happy people are much harder to seduce. Their contentment makes
hankered for warfare? them inaccessible. It is always easier to fish in troubled waters. Also, an air
Argos \ Had no wars to
of sadness is itself quite seductive—Genji, the hero of the Japanese novel
offer. Suppose he fancied
the courts? \ Argos lacked The Tale of Genji, could not resist a woman with a melancholic air. In
litigation. Love was better Kierkegaard's book The Seducer's Diary, the narrator, Johannes, has one
than doing nothing. \
main requirement in his victim: she must have imagination. That is why he
That's how Cupid slips
in; that's how he stays. chooses a woman who lives in a fantasy world, a woman who will envelop
his every gesture in poetry, imagining far more than is there. Just as it is
—OVID, CURES FOR LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN hard to seduce a person who is happy, it is hard to seduce a person who has
no imagination.
For women, the manly man is often the perfect victim. Mark Antony
The Chinese have a was of this type—he loved pleasure, was quite emotional, and when it
proverb: "When Yang is in came to women, found it hard to think straight. He was easy for Cleopatra
the ascendant, Yin is
to manipulate. Once she gained a hold on his emotions, she kept him per-
born," which means,
translated into our manently on a string. A woman should never be put off by a man who
language, that when a man seems overly aggressive. He is often the perfect victim. It is easy, with a few
has devoted the better of
coquettish tricks, to turn that aggression around and make him your slave.
his life to the ordinary
business of living, the Yin, Such men actually enjoy being made to chase after a woman.

[PAGE 201]
Choose the Right Victim • 173
Be careful with appearances. The person who seems volcanically pas- or emotional side of his
sionate is often hiding insecurity and self-involvement. This was what most nature, rises to the surface
and demands its rights.
men failed to perceive in the nineteenth-century courtesan Lola Montez.
When such a period occurs,
She seemed so dramatic, so exciting. In fact, she was a troubled, self-
all that which has formerly
obsessed woman, but by the time men discovered this it was too late—they seemed important loses its
had become involved with her and could not extricate themselves without significance. The will-of-
the-wisp of illusion leads
months of drama and torture. People who are outwardly distant or shy are
the man hither and thither,
often better targets than extroverts. They are dying to be drawn out, and taking him on strange and
still waters run deep. complicated deviations from
his former path in life.
People with a lot of time on their hands are extremely susceptible to se-
Ming Huang, the "Bright
duction. They have mental space for you to fill. Tullia d'Aragona, the infa- Emperor" of the T'ang
mous sixteenth-century Italian courtesan, preferred young men as her dynasty, was an example
of the profound truth of
victims; besides the physical reason for such a preference, they were more
this theory. From the
idle than working men with careers, and therefore more defenseless against moment he saw Yang
an ingenious seductress. On the other hand, you should generally avoid Kuei-fei bathing in the
lake near his palace in the
people who are preoccupied with business or work—seduction demands
Li mountains, he was
attention, and busy people have too little space in their minds for you to
destined to sit at her feet,
occupy. learning from her the
According to Freud, seduction begins early in life, in our relationship emotional mysteries of
what the Chinese call Yin.
with our parents. They seduce us physically, both with bodily contact and
by satisfying desires such as hunger, and we in turn try to seduce them into —ELOISE TALCOTT HIBBERT,
EMBROIDERED GAUZE:
paying us attention. We are creatures by nature vulnerable to seduction
PORTRAITS OF FAMOUS
throughout our lives. We all want to be seduced; we yearn to be drawn out CHINESE LADIES
of ourselves, out of our routines and into the drama of eros. And what
draws us more than anything is the feeling that someone has something we
don't, a quality we desire. Your perfect victims are often people who think
you have something they don't, and who will be enchanted to have it pro-
vided for them. Such victims may have a temperament quite the opposite
of yours, and this difference will create an exciting tension.
When Jiang Qing, later known as Madame Mao, first met Mao Tse-
tung in 1937 in his mountain retreat in western China, she could sense
how desperate he was for a bit of color and spice in his life: all the camp's
women dressed like the men, and abjured any feminine finery. Jiang had
been an actress in Shanghai, and was anything but austere. She supplied
what he lacked, and she also gave him the added thrill of being able to edu-
cate her in communism, appealing to his Pygmalion complex—the desire
to dominate, control, and remake a person. In fact it was Jiang Qing who
controlled her future husband.
The greatest lack of all is excitement and adventure, which is precisely
what seduction offers. In 1964, the Chinese actor Shi Pei Pu, a man who
had gained fame as a female impersonator, met Bernard Bouriscout, a young
diplomat assigned to the French embassy in China. Bouriscout had come
to China looking for adventure, and was disappointed to have little contact
with Chinese people. Pretending to be a woman who, when still a child,
had been forced to live as a boy—supposedly the family already had too
many daughters—Shi Pei Pu used the young Frenchman's boredom and

[PAGE 202]
174 • The Art of Seduction
discontent to manipulate him. Inventing a story of the deceptions he had
had to go through, he slowly drew Bouriscout into an affair that would last
many years. (Bouriscout had had previous homosexual encounters, but con-
sidered himself heterosexual.) Eventually the diplomat was led into spying
for the Chinese. All the while, he believed Shi Pei Pu was a woman—his
yearning for adventure had made him that vulnerable. Repressed types are
perfect victims for a deep seduction.
People who repress the appetite for pleasure make ripe victims, particu-
larly later in their lives. The eighth-century Chinese Emperor Ming Huang
spent much of his reign trying to rid his court of its costly addiction to lux-
uries, and was himself a model of austerity and virtue. But the moment he
saw the concubine Yang Kuei-fei bathing in a palace lake, everything
changed. The most charming woman in the realm, she was the mistress of
his son. Exerting his power, the emperor won her away—only to become
her abject slave.
The choice of the right victim is equally important in politics. Mass se-
ducers such as Napoleon or John F. Kennedy offer their public just what it
lacks. When Napoleon came to power, the French people's sense of pride
was beaten down by the bloody aftermath of the French Revolution. He
offered them glory and conquest. Kennedy recognized that Americans
were bored with the stultifying comfort of the Eisenhower years; he gave
them adventure and risk. More important, he tailored his appeal to the
group most vulnerable to it: the younger generation. Successful politicians
know that not everyone will be susceptible to their charm, but if they can
find a group of believers with a need to be filled, they have supporters who
will stand by them no matter what.
Symbol:
Big Game. Lions are dangerous—to hunt
them is to know the thrill of risk. Leopards are clever
and swift, offering the excitement of a difficult chase. Never
rush into the hunt. Know your prey and choose it carefully. Do
not waste time with small game—the rabbits that back into snares,
the mink that walk into a scented trap. Challenge is pleasure.

[PAGE 203]
Choose the Right Victim • 175
Reversal
There is no possible reversal. There is nothing to be gained from trying
to seduce the person who is closed to you, or who cannot provide the
pleasure and chase that you need.

[PAGE 204]


[PAGE 205]
Create a False Sense of Security-
Approach Indirectly
If you are too
direct early on, you risk stir-
ring up a resistance that will never be
lowered. At first there must be nothing of the
seducer in your manner. The seduction should begin
at an angle, indirectly, so that the target only gradually
becomes aware of you. Haunt the periphery of your target's
life—approach through a third party, or seem to cultivate a
relatively neutral relationship, moving gradually from friend to
lover. Arrange an occasional "chance" encounter, as if you and your
target were destined to become acquainted—nothing is more seductive
than a sense of destiny. Lull the target into feeling secure, then strike.

[PAGE 206]


[PAGE 207]
Friend to Lover
Anne Marie Louis d'Orléans, the Duchess de Montpensier, known in
seventeenth-century France as La Grande Mademoiselle, had never
known love in her life. Her mother had died when she was young; her fa-
ther remarried and ignored her. She came from one of Europe's most illus-
trious families: her grandfather had been King Henry IV; the future King
Louis XIV was her cousin. When she was young, matches had been pro- Many women adore the
posed between her and the widowed king of Spain, the son of the Holy elusive, \ Hate
overeagerness. So, play
Roman emperor, and even cousin Louis himself, among many others. But
hard to get, \ Stop boredom
all of these matches were designed for political purposes, or because of her
developing. And don't let
family's enormous wealth. No one bothered to woo her; she rarely even your entreaties \ Sound too
met her suitors. To make matters worse, the Grande Mademoiselle was an confident of possession.
Insinuate sex \
idealist who believed in the old-fashioned values of chivalry: courage, hon-
Camouflaged as friendship.
esty, virtue. She loathed the schemers whose motives in courting her were I've seen ultrastubborn
dubious at best. Whom could she trust? One by one she found a reason to creatures \ Fooled by this
gambit, the switch from
spurn them. Spinsterhood seemed to be her fate.
companion to stud.
In April of 1669, the Grande Mademoiselle, then forty-two, met one
—OVID, THEART OF LOVE,
of the strangest men in the court: the Marquis Antonin Peguilin, later
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
known as the Duke de Lauzun. A favorite of Louis XIV's, the thirty-six-
year-old Marquis was a brave soldier with an acid wit. He was also an in-
curable Don Juan. Although he was short, and certainly not handsome, his
impudent manners and his military exploits made him irresistible to
On the street, I do not stop
women. The Grande Mademoiselle had noticed him some years before, ad- her, or I exchange a
miring his elegance and boldness. But it was only this time, in 1669, that greeting with her but never
come close, but always
she had a real conversation with him, if a short one, and although she knew
strive for distance.
of his lady-killer reputation, she found him charming. A few days later they Presumably our repeated
ran into each other again; this time the conversation was longer, and encounters are clearly
noticeable to her;
Lauzun proved more intelligent than she had imagined—they talked of the
presumably she does
playwright Corneille (her favorite), of heroism, and of other elevated top-
perceive that on her
ics. Now their encounters became more frequent. They had become horizon a new planet has
friends. Anne Marie noted in her diary that her conversations with Lauzun, loomed, which in its course
has encroached disturbingly
when they occurred, were the highlight of her day; when he was not at
upon hers in a curiously
court, she felt his absence. Surely her encounters with him came frequently undisturbing way, but
enough that they could not be accidental on his part, but he always seemed she has no inkling of the
law underlying this
surprised to see her. At the same time, she recorded feeling uneasy—
movement. . . . Before I
strange emotions were stealing up on her, she did not know why. begin my attack, I must
179

[PAGE 208]
180 • The Art of Seduction
first become acquainted Time passed, and the Grande Mademoiselle was to leave Paris for a
with her and her whole week or two. Now Lauzun approached her without warning and made an
mental state.
emotional plea to be considered her confidante, the great friend who
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE would execute any commission she needed done while she was away. He
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
was poetic and chivalrous, but what did he really mean? In her diary, Anne
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG Marie finally confronted the emotions that had been stirring in her since
their first conversation: "I told myself, these are not vague musings; there
must be an object to all of these feelings, and I could not imagine who it
was. . . . Finally, after troubling myself with this for several days, I realized
No sooner had he spoken
than the bullocks, driven that it was M. de Lauzun whom I loved, it was he who had somehow
from their mountain slipped into my heart and captured it."
pastures, were on their way
Made aware of the source of her feelings, the Grande Mademoiselle
to the beach, as Jove had
became more direct. If Lauzun was to be her confidante, she could talk to
directed; they were making
for the sands where the him of marriage, of the matches that were still being offered to her. The
daughter [Europa] of the topic might give him a chance to express his feelings; perhaps he might
great king used to play
show jealousy. Unfortunately Lauzun did not seem to take the hint. In-
with the young girls of
Tyre, who were her com- stead, he asked her why she was thinking of marriage at all—she seemed
panions. • . . . Aban- so happy. Besides, who could possibly be worthy of her? This went
doning the dignity of his
on for weeks. She could pry nothing personal out of him. In a way, she
scepter, the father and ruler
of the gods, whose hand understood—there were the differences in rank (she was far above him) and
wields the flaming three- age (she was six years older). Then, a few months later, the wife of the
forked bolt, whose nod
king's brother died, and King Louis suggested to the Grande Mademoiselle
shakes the universe,
adopted the guise of a bull; that she replace his late sister-in-law—that is, that she marry his brother.
and, mingling with the Anne Marie was disgusted; clearly the brother was trying to get his hands
other bullocks, joined in the on her fortune. She asked Lauzun his opinion. As the king's loyal servants,
lowing and ambled in the
he replied, they must obey the royal wish. His answer did not please her,
tender grass, a fair sight to
sec. His hide was white as and to make things worse, he stopped visiting her, as if it were no longer
untrodden snow, snow not proper for them to be friends. This was the last straw. The Grande Made-
yet melted by the rainy
moiselle told the king she would not marry his brother, and that was that.
South wind. The muscles
stood out on his neck, and Now Anne Marie met with Lauzun, and told him she would write on a
deep folds of skin hung piece of paper the name of the man she had wanted to marry all along. He
along his flanks. His horns
was to put the paper under his pillow and read it the next morning. When
were small, it is true, but
so beautifully made that he did, he found the words "C'est vous"—It is you. Seeing the Grande
you would swear they were Mademoiselle the following evening, Lauzun said she must have been jok-
the work of an artist, more
ing; she would make him the laughing stock of the court. She insisted that
polished and shining than
any jewel. There was no she was serious. He seemed shocked, surprised—but not as surprised as the
menace in the set of his rest of the court was a few weeks later, when an engagement was an-
head or in his eyes; he
nounced between this relatively low-ranking Don Juan and the second-
looked completely placid. •
highest-ranking lady in France, a woman known for both her virtue and
Agenor's daughter
[Europa] was filled with her skill at defending it.
admiration for one so
handsome and so friendly.
But, gentle though he
seemed, she was afraid at Interpretation. The Duke de Lauzun was one of the greatest seducers in
first to touch him; then she history, and his slow and steady seduction of the Grande Mademoiselle was
went closer, and held out
his masterpiece. His method was simple: indirection. Sensing her interest in
flowers to his shining lips.
The lover was delighted him in that first conversation, he decided to beguile her with friendship.

[PAGE 209]
Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly • 181
He would become her most devoted friend. At first this was charming; a and, until he could achieve
man was taking the time to talk to her, of poetry, history, the deeds of h is hoped-for pleasure,
kissed her hands. He could
war—her favorite subjects. She slowly began to confide in him. Then, al-
scarcely wait for the rest,
most without her realizing it, her feelings shifted: the consummate ladies'
only with great difficulty
man was only interested in friendship? He was not attracted to her as a did he restrain himself. •
woman? Such thoughts made her aware that she had fallen in love with Now he frolicked and
played on the green turf
him. This, in part, was what eventually made her turn down the match
now lay down, all snowy
with the king's brother—a decision cleverly and indirectly provoked by white on the yellow sand.
Lauzun himself, when he stopped visiting her. And how could he be after Gradually the princess lost
her fear, and with her
money or position, or sex, when he had never made any kind of move?
innocent hands she stroked
No, the brilliance of Lauzun's seduction was that the Grande Mademoiselle his breast when he offered
believed it was she who was making all the moves. it for her caress, and hung
fresh garlands on his horns:
Once you have chosen the right victim, you must get his or her at-
till finally she even
tention and stir desire. To move from friendship to love can win success ventured to mount the bull,
without calling attention to itself as a maneuver. First, your friendly con- little knowing on whose
back she was resting. Then
versations with your targets will bring you valuable information about their
the god drew away from
characters, their tastes, their weaknesses, the childhood yearnings that gov-
the shore by easy stages,
ern their adult behavior. (Lauzun, for example, could adapt cleverly to first planting the hooves
Anne Marie's tastes once he had studied her close up.) Second, by spending that were part of his
disguise in the surf at the
time with your targets you can make them comfortable with you. Believing
water's edge, and then
you are interested only in their thoughts, in their company, they will lower proceeding farther out to
their resistance, dissipating the usual tension between the sexes. Now they sea, till he bore his booty
away over the wide
are vulnerable, for your friendship with them has opened the golden gate to
stretches of mid ocean.
their body: their mind. At this point any offhand comment, any slight
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
physical contact, will spark a different thought, which will catch them off-
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
guard: perhaps there could be something else between you. Once that feel-
ing has stirred, they will wonder why you haven't made a move, and will
take the initiative themselves, enjoying the illusion that they are in control.
These few reflections lead
There is nothing more effective in seduction than making the seduced
us to the understanding
think that they are the ones doing the seducing. that, since in attempting a
seduction it is up to the
man to make the first steps,
I do not approach her, I merely skirt the periphery of her
for the seducer, to seduce is
existence. . . . This is the first web into which she must be nothing more than reducing
spun. the distance, in this case
that of the difference
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD between the sexes and that,
in order to accomplish this,
it is necessary to feminize
Key to Seduction himself or at least identify
himself with the object of
his seduction. . . . As
What you are after as a seducer is the ability to move people in the di- Alain Roger writes: "If
rection you want them to go. But the game is perilous; the mo- there is a seduction, it is
the seducer who is first lead
ment they suspect they are acting under your influence, they will become
astray, in the sense that he
resentful. We are creatures who cannot stand feeling that we are obeying abdicates his own sex. . . .
someone else's will. Should your targets catch on, sooner or later they will Seduction undoubtedly
aims at sexual
turn against you. But what if you can make them do what you want them
consummation, but it only
to without their realizing it? What if they think they are in control? That is gets there in creating a kind

[PAGE 210]
182 • The Art of Seduction
of simulacra of Gomorra. the power of indirection and no seducer can work his or her magic with-
The seducer is nothing out it.
more than a lesbian."
The first move to master is simple: once you have chosen the right per-
—FRÉDÉRIC MONNEYRON, son, you must make the target come to you. If, in the opening stages, you
SÉDUIRE: L'IMAGINAIRE DE LA
can make your targets think that they are the ones making the first ap-
SÉDUCTION DE DON GIOVANNI
À MICK JAGGER proach, you have won the game. There will be no resentment, no perverse
counterreaction, no paranoia.
To make them come to you requires giving them space. This can be
As he [Jupiter] was
hurrying busily to and fro, accomplished in several ways. You can haunt the periphery of their exis-
he stopped short at the tence, letting them notice you in different places but never approaching
sight of an Arcadian
them. You will get their attention this way, and if they want to bridge the
maiden. The fire of
passion kindled the very gap, they will have to come to you. You can befriend them, as Lauzun did
marrow of his bones. This the Grande Mademoiselle, moving steadily closer while always maintaining
girl was not one who spent
the distance appropriate for friends of the opposite sex. You can also play
her time in spinning soft
cat and mouse with them, first seeming interested, then stepping back—
fibers of wool, or in
arranging her hair in actively luring them to follow you into your web. Whatever you do, and
different styles. She was whatever kind of seduction you are practicing, you must at all cost avoid
one of Diana's warriors,
the natural tendency to crowd your targets. Do not make the mistake of
wearing her tunic pinned
together with a brooch, her thinking they will lose interest unless you apply pressure, or that they will
tresses carelessly caught enjoy a flood of attention. Too much attention early on will actually just
back by a white ribbon,
suggest insecurity, and raise doubts as to your motives. Worst of all, it gives
and carrying in her hand a
light javelin or her your targets no room for imagination. Take a step back; let the thoughts
bow. . . . • The sun on you are provoking come to them as if they were their own. This is doubly
high had passed its zenith,
important if you are dealing with someone who has a deep effect on you.
when she entered a grove
We can never really understand the opposite sex. They are always mys-
whose trees had never felt
the axe. Here she took her terious to us, and it is this mystery that provides the tension so delightful in
quiver from her shoulders, seduction; but it is also a source of unease. Freud famously wondered what
unstrung her pliant bow,
women really wanted; even to this most insightful of psychological
and lay down on the
turf, resting her head on thinkers, the opposite sex was a foreign land. For both men and women,
her painted quiver. When there are deep-rooted feelings of fear and anxiety in relation to the oppo-
Jupiter saw her thus, tired
site sex. In the initial stages of a seduction, then, you must find ways to
and unprotected, he
said: "Here is a secret of calm any sense of mistrust that the other person may experience. (A sense
which my wife will know of danger and fear can heighten the seduction later on, but if you stir such
nothing; or if she does get
emotions in the first stages, you will more likely scare the target away.) Es-
to know of it, it will be
worth her reproaches!" • tablish a neutral distance, seem harmless, and you give yourself room to
Without wasting time he move. Casanova cultivated a slight femininity in his character—an interest
assumed the appearance in clothes, theater, domestic matters—that young girls found comforting.
and the dress of Diana,
The Renaissance courtesan Tullia d'Aragona, developing friendships with the
and spoke to the girl.
'Dearest of all my great thinkers and poets of her time, talked of literature and philosophy—
companions," he said, anything but the boudoir (and anything but the money that was also her
"where have you been
goal). Johannes, the narrator of Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, fol-
hunting? On what
mountain ridges?" She lows his target, Cordelia, from a distance; when their paths cross, he is po-
raised herself from the lite and apparently shy. As Cordelia gets to know him, he doesn't frighten
grass: "Greeting, divine
her. In fact he is so innocuous she begins to wish he were less so.
mistress," she cried,
"greater in my sight than Duke Ellington, the great jazz artist and a consummate seducer, would

[PAGE 211]
Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly • 183
initially dazzle the ladies with his good looks, stylish clothing, and cha- Jove himself—I care not
risma. But once he was alone with a woman, he would take a slight step if he hears me!" Jove
laughed to hear her words.
back, becoming excessively polite, making only small talk. Banal conversa-
Delighted to be preferred to
tion can be a brilliant tactic; it hypnotizes the target. The dullness of your
himself, he kissed her—not
front gives the subtlest suggestive word, the slightest look, an amplified with the restraint becoming
power. Never mention love and you make its absence speak volumes—your to a maiden's kisses: and
as she began to tell of her
victims will wonder why you never discuss your emotions, and as they have
hunting exploits in the
such thoughts, they will go further, imagining what else is going on in your forest, he prevented her by
mind. They will be the ones to bring up the topic of love or affection. De- his embrace, and betrayed
his real self by a shameful
liberate dullness has many applications. In psychotherapy, the doctor makes
action. So far from
monosyllabic responses to draw patients in, making them relax and open complying, she resisted
up. In international negotiations, Henry Kissinger would lull diplomats him as far as a woman
could . . . but how could a
with boring details, then strike with bold demands. Early in a seduction,
girl overcome a man, and
less-colorful words are often more effective than vivid ones—the target who could defeat Jupiter?
tunes them out, looks at your face, begins to imagine, fantasize, fall under He had his way, and
your spell. returned to the upper air.
Getting to your targets through other people is extremely effective; in- —OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
filtrate their circle and you are no longer a stranger. Before the seventeenth-
century seducer Count de Grammont made a move, he would befriend his
target's chambermaid, her valet, a friend, even a lover. In this way he could
I had rather hear my dog
gather information, finding a way to approach her in an unthreatening
bark at a crow than a man
manner. He could also plant ideas, saying things the third party was likely swear he loves me.
to repeat, things that would intrigue the lady, particularly when they came
—BEATRICE, IN WILLIAM
from someone she knew. SHAKESPEARE, MUCH ADO
Ninon de l'Enclos, the seventeenth-century courtesan and strategist of ABOUT NOTHING
seduction, believed that disguising one's intentions was not only a necessity,
it added to the pleasure of the game. A man should never declare his feel-
I know of a man whose
ings, she felt, particularly early on. It is irritating and provokes mistrust. "A
beloved was completely
woman is much better persuaded that she is loved by what she guesses than friendly and at ease with
by what she is told," Ninon once remarked. Often a person's haste in de- him; but if he had
disclosed by the least
claring his or her feelings comes from a false desire to please, thinking this
gesture that he was in love,
will flatter the other. But the desire to please can annoy and offend. Chil- the beloved would have
dren, cats, and coquettes draw us to them by apparently not trying, even by become as remote from
him as the Pleiades, whose
seeming uninterested. Learn to disguise your feelings and let people figure
stars hang so high in
out what is happening for themselves. heaven. It is a sort of
In all arenas of life, you should never give the impression that you are statesmanship that is
required in such cases; the
angling for something—that will raise a resistance that you will never lower.
party concerned was
Learn to approach people from the side. Mute your colors, blend in, seem
enjoying the pleasure of his
unthreatening, and you will have more room to maneuver later on. The loved one's company
same holds true in politics, where overt ambition often frightens people. intensely and to the last
degree, but if he had so
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin at first glance looked like an everyday Russian; he
much as hinted at his inner
dressed like a worker, spoke with a peasant accent, had no air of greatness. feelings he would have
This made the public feel comfortable and identify with him. Yet beneath attained but a miserable
fraction of the beloved's
this apparently bland appearance, of course, was a deeply clever man who
favor, and endured into the
was always maneuvering. By the time people realized this it was too late. bargain all the arrogance

[PAGE 212]
184 • The Art of Seduction
and caprice of which love is Symbol: The Spider's Web. The spider finds an innocuous corner in
capable.
which to spin its web. The longer the web takes, the more fabulous
—IBN HAZM; THE RING OF
THE DOVE: A TREATISE ON THE its construction, yet few really notice it—its gossamer threads are
ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A. J. nearly invisible. The spider has no need to chase for food, or
ARBERRY
even to move. It quietly sits in the corner, waiting for its
victims to come to it on their own, and ensnare
themselves in the web.
Reversal
In warfare, you need space to align your troops, room to maneuver. The
more space you have, the more intricate your strategy can be. But some-
times it is better to overwhelm the enemy, giving them no time to think or
react. Although Casanova adapted his strategies to the woman in question,
he would often try to make an immediate impression, stirring her desire at
the first encounter. Perhaps he would perform some gallantry, rescuing a
woman in danger; perhaps he would dress so that his target would notice
him in a crowd. In either case, once he had the woman's attention he
would move with lightning speed. A Siren like Cleopatra tries to have an
immediate physical effect on men, giving her victims no time or space to
retreat. She uses the element of surprise. The first period of your contact
with someone can involve a level of desire that will never be repeated;
boldness will carry the day.
But these are short seductions. The Sirens and the Casanovas only get
pleasure from the number of their victims, moving quickly from conquest
to conquest, and this can be tiring. Casanova burned himself out; Sirens,
insatiable, are never satisfied. The indirect, carefully constructed seduction
may reduce the number of your conquests, but more than compensate by
their quality.

[PAGE 213]
Send Mixed Signals
Once people are aware of your presence, and
perhaps vaguely intrigued, you need to stir their
interest before it settles on someone else. What is ob-
vious and striking may attract their attention at first, but
that attention is often short-lived; in the long run, ambi-
guity is much more potent. Most of us are much too obvi-
ous—instead, be hard to figure out. Send mixed signals:
both tough and tender, both spiritual and earthy, both inno-
cent and cunning. A mix of qualities suggests depth, which
fascinates even as it confuses. An elusive, enigmatic aura
will make people want to know more, drawing them
into your circle. Create such a power by hinting
at something contradictory within you.

[PAGE 214]


[PAGE 215]
Good and Bad
In 1806, when Prussia and France were at war, Auguste, the handsome
twenty-four-year-old prince of Prussia and nephew of Frederick the
Great, was captured by Napoleon. Instead of locking him up, Napoleon al-
lowed him to wander around French territory, keeping a close watch on
him through spies. The prince was devoted to pleasure, and spent his time
Reichardt had seen Juliette
moving from town to town, seducing young girls. In 1807 he decided to
at another ball, protesting
visit the Château de Coppet, in Switzerland, where lived the great French coyly that she would not
writer Madame de Stae'l. dance, and then, after a
while, throwing off her
Auguste was greeted by his hostess with as much ceremony as she could
heavy evening gown, to
muster. After she had introduced him to her other guests, they all retired to reveal a light dress
a drawing room, where they talked of Napoleon's war in Spain, the current underneath. On all sides,
there were murmurs and
Paris fashions, and so on. Suddenly the door opened and another guest en-
whisperings about her
tered, a woman who had somehow stayed in her room during the hubbub coquetry and affectation.
of the prince's entrance. It was the thirty-year-old Madame Récamier, As ever, she wore white
satin, cut very low in the
Madame de Staël's closest friend. She introduced herself to the prince, then
back, revealing her
quickly retired to her bedroom. charming shoulders. The
Auguste had known that Madame Récamier was at the château. In fact men implored her to dance
for them. ... To soft
he had heard many stories about this infamous woman, who, in the years
music she floated into the
after the French Revolution, was considered the most beautiful in France. room in her diaphanous
Men had gone wild over her, particularly at balls when she would take off Greek robe. Her head was
bound with a muslin fichu.
her evening wrap, revealing the diaphanous white dresses that she had made
She bowed timidly to the
famous, and dance with such abandon. The painters Gérard and David had audience, and then,
immortalized her face and fashions, and even her feet, considered the most spinning round lightly, she
shook a transparent scarf
beautiful anyone had ever seen; and she had broken the heart of Lucien
with her fingertips, so that
Bonaparte, the Emperor Napoleon's brother. Auguste liked his girls
in turns it billowed into the
younger than Madame Récamier, and he had come to the château to rest. semblance of a drapery, a
But those few moments in which she had stolen the scene with her sudden veil, a cloud. All this with
a strange blend of precision
entrance caught him off guard: she was as beautiful as people had said, but
and languor. She used her
more striking than her beauty was that look of hers that seemed so sweet, eyes in a subtle fascinating
indeed heavenly, with a hint of sadness in the eyes. The other guests con- way— "she danced with
her eyes." The women
tinued their conversations, but Auguste could only think of Madame
thought that all that
Récamier. serpentine undulating of
the body, all that
Over dinner that evening, he watched her. She did not talk much, and
nonchalant rhythmic
kept her eyes downward, but once or twice she looked up—directly at the nodding of the head, were
prince. After dinner the guests assembled in the gallery, and a harp was sensuous; the men were
brought in. To the prince's delight, Madame Récamier began to play, wafted into a realm of
187

[PAGE 216]
188 • The Art of Seduction
unearthly bliss. Juliette was singing a love song. And now, suddenly, she changed: there was a roguish
an ange fatal, and much look in her eye as she glanced at him. The angelic voice, the glances, the
more dangerous for looking
energy animating her face, sent his mind reeling. He was confused. When
like an angel! The music
grew fainter. Suddenly, by the same thing happened the next night, the prince decided to extend his
a deft trick, Juliette's stay at the château.
chestnut hair was loosened
In the days that followed, the prince and Madame Récamier took walks
and fell in clouds around
her. A little out of breath, together, rowed out on the lake, and attended dances, where he finally held
she disappeared into her her in his arms. They would talk late into the night. But nothing grew clear
dimly lit boudoir. And to him: she would seem so spiritual, so noble, and then there would be
there the crowd followed
a touch of the hand, a sudden flirtatious remark. After two weeks at the
her and beheld her reclining
on her daybed in a loose château, the most eligible bachelor in Europe forgot all his libertine habits
tea-gown, looking and proposed marriage to Madame Récamier. He would convert to Catholi-
fashionably pale, like
cism, her religion, and she would divorce her much older husband. (She
Gérard's Psyche, while her
maids cooled her brow with had told him her marriage had never been consummated and so the
toilet water. Catholic church could annul it.) She would then come to live with him in
—MARGARET TROUNCER, Prussia. Madame promised to do as he wished. The prince hurried off to
MADAME RÉCAMIER Prussia to seek the approval of his family, and Madame returned to Paris
to secure the required annulment. Auguste flooded her with love letters,
and waited. Time passed; he felt he was going mad. Then, finally, a letter:
The idea that two distinct
she had changed her mind.
elements are combined in
Mona Lisa's smile is one Some months later, Madame Récamier sent Auguste a gift: Gérard's fa-
that has struck several mous painting of her reclining on a sofa. The prince spent hours in front of
critics. They accordingly
it, trying to pierce the mystery behind her gaze. He had joined the com-
find in the beautiful
Florentine's expression the pany of her conquests—of men like the writer Benjamin Constant, who
most perfect representation said of her, "She was my last love. For the rest of my life I was like a tree
of the contrasts that
struck by lightning."
dominate the erotic life of
women; the contrast
between reserve and
seduction, and between the Interpretation. Madame Récamier's list of conquests became only more
most devoted tenderness
impressive as she grew older: there was Prince Metternich, the Duke of
and a sensuality that is
ruthlessly demanding— Wellington, the writers Constant and Chateaubriand. For all of these men
consuming men as if they she was an obsession, which only increased in intensity when they were
were alien beings.
away from her. The source of her power was twofold. First, she had an an-
—SIGMUND FREUD, LEONARDO gelic face, which drew men to her. It appealed to paternal instincts, charm-
DA VINCI AND A MEMORY OF
ing with its innocence. But then there was a second quality peeking
HIS CHILDHOOD, TRANSLATED
BY ALAN TYSON through, in the flirtatious looks, the wild dancing, the sudden gaiety—all
these caught men off guard. Clearly there was more to her than they had
thought, an intriguing complexity. When alone, they would find them-
[Oscar Wilde's] hands
selves pondering these contradictions, as if a poison were coursing through
were fat and flabby; his
handshake lacked grip, and their blood. Madame Récamier was an enigma, a problem that had to be
at a first encounter one solved. Whatever it was that you wanted, whether a coquettish she-devil or
recoiled from its plushy
an unattainable goddess, she could seem to be. She surely encouraged this
limpness, but this aversion
was soon overcome when illusion by keeping her men at a certain distance, so they could never figure
he began to talk, for his her out. And she was the queen of the calculated effect, like her surprise
genuine kindliness and
entrance at the Château de Coppet, which made her the center of atten-
desire to please made one
tion, if only for a few seconds.
forget what was unpleasant

[PAGE 217]
Send Mixed Signals • 189
The seductive process involves filling someone's mind with your image. in his physical appearance
Your innocence, or your beauty, or your flirtatiousness can attract their at- and contact, gave charm to
his manners, and grace to
tention but not their obsession; they will soon move on to the next striking
his precision of speech. The
image. To deepen their interest, you must hint at a complexity that cannot
first sight of him affected
be grasped in a week or two. You are an elusive mystery, an irresistible lure, people in various ways.
promising great pleasure if only it can be possessed. Once they begin to Some could hardly restrain
their laughter, others felt
fantasize about you, they are on the brink of the slippery slope of seduc-
hostile, a few were afflicted
tion, and will not be able to stop themselves from sliding down. with the "creeps" many
were conscious of being
uneasy, but except for a
small minority who could
Artificial and Natural
never recover from the first
sensation of distaste and so
The big Broadway hit of 1881 was Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta Pa- kept out of his way, both
sexes found him irresistible,
tience, a satire on the bohemian world of aesthetes and dandies that had and to the young men of
become so fashionable in London. To cash in on this vogue, the operetta's his time, says W. B. Yeats,
he was like a triumphant
promoters decided to invite one of England's most infamous aesthetes to
and audacious figure from
America for a lecture tour: Oscar Wilde. Only twenty-seven at the time,
another age.
Wilde was more famous for his public persona than for his small body of
—HESKETH PEARSON, OSCAR
work. The American promoters were confident that their public would be
WILDE: HIS LIFE AND WIT
fascinated by this man, whom they imagined as always walking around with
a flower in his hand, but they did not expect it to last; he would do a few
lectures, then the novelty would wear off, and they would ship him home.
Once upon a time there
The money was good and Wilde accepted. On his arrival in New York, a was a magnet, and in its
customs man asked him whether he had anything to declare: "I have noth- close neighborhood lived
ing to declare," he replied, "except my genius." some steel filings. One day
two or three little filings felt
The invitations poured in—New York society was curious to meet this
a sudden desire to go and
oddity. Women found Wilde enchanting, but the newspapers were less visit the magnet, and they
kind; The New York Times called him an "aesthetic sham." Then, a week af- began to talk of what a
pleasant thing it would be
ter his arrival, he gave his first lecture. The hall was packed; more than a
to do. Other filings nearby
thousand people came, many of them just to see what he looked like. They overheard their
were not disappointed. Wilde did not carry a flower, and was taller than conversation, and they, too,
became infected with the
they had expected, but he had long flowing hair and wore a green velvet
same desire. Still others
suit and cravat, as well as knee breeches and silk stockings. Many in the au- joined them, till at last all
dience were put off; as they looked up at him from their seats, the combi- the filings began to discuss
the matter, and more and
nation of his large size and pretty attire were rather repulsive. Some people
more their vague desire
openly laughed, others could not hide their unease. They expected to hate grew into an impulse.
the man. Then he began to speak. "Why not go today?" said
one of them; but others
The subject was the "English Renaissance," the "art for art's sake"
were of opinion that it
movement in late-nineteenth-century England. Wilde's voice proved hyp-
would be better to wait
notic; he spoke in a kind of meter, mannered and artificial, and few really until tomorrow.
understood what he was saying, but the speech was so witty, and it flowed. Meanwhile, without their
having noticed it, they had
His appearance was certainly strange, but overall, no New Yorker had ever
been involuntarily moving
seen or heard such an intriguing man, and the lecture was a huge success. nearer to the magnet,
Even the newspapers warmed up to it. In Boston a few weeks later, some which lay there quite still,
apparently taking no heed
sixty Harvard boys had prepared an ambush: they would make fun of this
of them. And so they went
effeminate poet by dressing in knee breeches, carrying flowers, and ap- on discussing, all the time

[PAGE 218]
190 • The Art of Seduction
insensibly drawing nearer plauding far too loudly at his entrance. Wilde was not the least bit flustered.
to their neighbor; and the The audience laughed hysterically at his improvised comments, and when
more they talked, the more
the boys heckled him he kept his dignity, betraying no anger at all. Once
they felt the impulse
growing stronger, till the again, the contrast between his manner and his physical appearance made
more impatient ones him seem rather extraordinary. Many were deeply impressed, and Wilde
declared that they would go
was well on his way to becoming a sensation.
that day, whatever the rest
The short lecture tour turned into a cross-country affair. In San Fran-
did. Some were heard to
say that it was their duty cisco, this visiting lecturer on art and aesthetics proved able to drink every-
to visit the magnet, and one under the table and play poker, which made him the hit of the season.
they ought to have gone
On his way back from the West Coast, Wilde was to make stops in Colo-
long ago. And, while they
talked, they moved always rado, and was warned that if the pretty-boy poet dared to show up in the
nearer and nearer, without mining town of Leadville, he would be hung from the highest tree. It was
realizing that they had
an invitation Wilde could not refuse. Arriving in Leadville, he ignored the
moved. Then, at last, the
impatient ones prevailed, hecklers and nasty looks; he toured the mines, drank and played cards, then
and, with one irresistible lectured on Botticelli and Cellini in the saloons. Like everyone else, the
impulse, the whole body
miners fell under his spell, even naming a mine after him. One cowboy was
cried out, "There is no use
heard to say, "That fellow is some art guy, but he can drink any of us under
waiting. We will go today.
We will go now. We will the table and afterwards carry us home two at a time."
go at once." And then in
one unanimous mass they
swept along, and in
another moment were Interpretation. In a fable he improvised at dinner once, Oscar Wilde talked
clinging fast to the magnet about some steel filings that had a sudden desire to visit a nearby magnet.
on every side. Then the
As they talked to each other about this, they found themselves moving
magnet smiled—for the
steel filings had no doubt closer to the magnet without realizing how or why. Finally they were swept
at all but that they were in one mass to the magnet's side. "Then the magnet smiled—for the steel
paying that visit of their filings had no doubt at all but that they were paying that visit of their
own free will.
own free will." Such was the effect that Wilde himself had on everyone
—OSCAR WILDE, AS QUOTED BY
around him.
RICHARD LE GALLIENNE IN
HESKETH PEARSON, OSCAR Wilde's attractiveness was more than just a by-product of his character,
WILDE: HIS LIFE AND WIT it was quite calculated. An adorer of paradox, he consciously played up his
own weirdness and ambiguity, the contrast between his mannered appear-
Now that the bohort
ance and his witty, effortless performance. Naturally warm and sponta-
[impromptu joust] was over
and the knights were neous, he constructed an image that ran counter to his nature. People were
dispersing and each making repelled, confused, intrigued, and finally drawn to this man who seemed
his way to where his impossible to figure out.
thoughts inclined him, it
Paradox is seductive because it plays with meaning. We are secretly op-
chanced that Rivalin was
heading for where lovely pressed by the rationality in our lives, where everything is meant to mean
Blancheflor was sitting. something; seduction, by contrast, thrives on ambiguity, on mixed signals,
Seeing this, he galloped up
on anything that eludes interpretation. Most people are painfully obvious.
to her and looking her in
the eyes saluted her most If their character is showy, we may be momentarily attracted, but the at-
pleasantly. • "God save traction wears off; there is no depth, no contrary motion, to pull us in. The
you, lovely woman!" •
key to both attracting and holding attention is to radiate mystery. And no
"Thank you," said the
girl, and continued very one is naturally mysterious, at least not for long; mystery is something you
bashfully, "may God have to work at, a ploy on your part, and something that must be used early
Almighty, who makes all
on in the seduction. Let one part of your character show, so everyone no-
hearts glad, gladden your
tices it. (In the example of Wilde, this was the mannered affectation con-
heart and mind! And my

[PAGE 219]
Send Mixed Signals • 191
veyed by his clothes and poses.) But also send out a mixed signal—some grateful thanks to you!—
sign that you are not what you seem, a paradox. Do not worry if this yet not forgetting a bone I
have to pick with you." •
underquality is a negative one, like danger, cruelty, or amorality; people
"Ah, sweet woman, what
will be drawn to the enigma anyway, and pure goodness is rarely seductive. have I done?" was
courteous Rivalin's reply. •
Paradox with him was only truth standing on its head to "You have annoyed me
through a friend of mine,
attract attention.
the best I ever had. " •
"Good heavens," thought
—RICHARD LE GALLIENNE, ON HIS FRIEND OSCAR WILDE
he, "what does this mean?
What have I done to
displease her? What does
Keys to Seduction
she say I have done?" and
he imagined that
Nothing can proceed in seduction unless you can attract and hold your unwittingly he must have
injured a kinsman of hers
victim's attention, your physical presence becoming a haunting men- some time at their knightly
tal presence. It is actually quite easy to create that first stir—an alluring style sports and that was why
she was vexed with him.
of dress, a suggestive glance, something extreme about you. But what hap-
But no, the friend she
pens next? Our minds are barraged with images—not just from media but
referred to was her heart, in
from the disorder of daily life. And many of these images are quite striking. which he made her suffer:
You become just one more thing screaming for attention; your attractive- that was the friend she
spoke of But he knew
ness will pass unless you spark the more enduring kind of spell that makes
nothing of that. • "Lovely
people think of you in your absence. That means engaging their imagina- woman," he said with all
tions, making them think there is more to you than what they see. Once his accustomed charm, "I
do not want you to be
they start embellishing your image with their fantasies, they are hooked.
angry with me or bear me
This must, however, be done early on, before your targets know too any ill will. So, if what
much and their impressions of you are set. It should occur the moment you tell me is true,
pronounce sentence on me
they lay eyes on you. By sending mixed signals in that first encounter, you
yourself: I will do whatever
create a little surprise, a little tension: you seem to be one thing (innocent, you command." • "I do
brash, intellectual, witty), but you also throw them a glimpse of something not hate you overmuch for
what has happened," was
else (devilish, shy, spontaneous, sad). Keep things subtle: if the second
the sweet girl's answer,
quality is too strong, you will seem schizophrenic. But make them wonder
"nor do I love you for it.
why you might be shy or sad underneath your brash intellectual wit, and But to see what amends
you will have their attention. Give them an ambiguity that lets them see you will make for the
wrong you have done me, I
what they want to see, capture their imagination with little voyeuristic
shall test you another
glimpses into your dark soul. time." • And so he bowed
The Greek philosopher Socrates was one of history's greatest seducers; as if to go, and she, lovely
girl, sighed at him most
the young men who followed him as students were not just fascinated by
secretly and said with
his ideas, they fell in love with him. One such youth was Alcibiades, the tender feeling: • "Ah, dear
notorious playboy who became a powerful political figure near the end of friend, God bless you!"
From this time on the
the fifth century B.C. In Plato's Symposium, Alcibiades describes Socrates's
thoughts of each ran on the
seductive powers by comparing him to the little figures of Silenus that were other. • Rivalin turned
made back then. In Greek myth, Silenus was quite ugly, but also a wise away, pondering many
things. He pondered from
prophet. Accordingly the statues of Silenus were hollow, and when you
many sides why
took them apart, you would find little figures of gods inside them—the in-
Blancheflor should be
ner truth and beauty under the unappealing exterior. And so, for Alci- vexed, and what lay
biades, it was the same with Socrates, who was so ugly as to be repellent but behind it all. He
considered her greeting, her
whose face radiated inner beauty and contentment. The effect was confus-

[PAGE 220]
192 • The Art of Seduction
words; he examined her ing and attractive. Antiquity's other great seducer, Cleopatra, also sent out
sigh minutely, her farewell, mixed signals: by all accounts physically alluring, in voice, face, body, and
he whole behavior. . . But
manner, she also had a brilliantly active mind, which for many writers of
since he was uncertain of
her motive—whether she the time made her seem somewhat masculine in spirit. These contrary
had acted from enmity or qualities gave her complexity, and complexity gave her power.
love—he wavered in
To capture and hold attention, you need to show attributes that go
perplexity. He wavered
against your physical appearance, creating depth and mystery. If you have a
in his thoughts now here,
now there. At one moment sweet face and an innocent air, let out hints of something dark, even
he was off in one direction, vaguely cruel in your character. It is not advertised in your words, but in
then suddenly in another,
your manner. The actor Errol Flynn had a boyishly angelic face and a slight
till he had so ensnared
himself in the toils of his air of sadness. Beneath this outward appearance, however, women could
own desire that he was sense an underlying cruelty, a criminal streak, an exciting kind of danger-
powerless to escape . . . •
ousness. This play of contrary qualities attracted obsessive interest. The
His entanglement had
placed him in a quandary, female equivalent is the type epitomized by Marilyn Monroe; she had
for he did not know the face and voice of a little girl, but something sexual and naughty em-
whether she wished him
anated powerfully from her as well. Madame Récamier did it all with her
well or ill; he could not
make out whether she eyes—the gaze of an angel, suddenly interrupted by something sensual and
loved or hated him. No flirtatious.
hope or despair did he
Playing with gender roles is a kind of intriguing paradox that has a long
consider which did not
history in seduction. The greatest Don Juans have had a touch of prettiness
forbid him either to advance
or retreat—hope and and femininity, and the most attractive courtesans have had a masculine
despair led him to and fro streak. The strategy, though, is only powerful when the underquality is
in unresolved dissension.
merely hinted at; if the mix is too obvious or striking it will seem bizarre or
Hope spoke to him of love,
despair of hatred. Because even threatening. The great seventeenth-century French courtesan Ninon
of this discord he could de l'Enclos was decidedly feminine in appearance, yet everyone who met
yield his firm belief neither
her was struck by a touch of aggressiveness and independence in her—but
to hatred nor yet to love.
Thus his feelings drifted in just a touch. The late nineteenth-century Italian novelist Gabriele d'An-
an unsure haven—hope nunzio was certainly masculine in his approaches, but there was a gentle-
bore him on, despair away.
ness, a consideration, mixed in, and an interest in feminine finery The
He found no constancy in
combinations can be juggled every which way: Oscar Wilde was quite
either; they agreed neither
one way or another. When feminine in appearance and manner, but the underlying suggestion that he
despair came and told him was actually quite masculine drew both men and women to him.
that his Blancheflor was
A potent variation on this theme is the blending of physical heat and
his enemy he faltered and
sought to escape: but at emotional coldness. Dandies like Beau Brummel and Andy Warhol com-
once came hope, bringing bine striking physical appearances with a kind of coldness of manner, a dis-
him her love, and a fond
tance from everything and everyone. They are both enticing and elusive,
aspiration, and so perforce
he remained. In the face of and people spend lifetimes chasing after such men, trying to shatter their
such discord he did not unattainability. (The power of apparently unattainable people is devilishly
know where to turn: no-
seductive; we want to be the one to break them down.) They also wrap
where could he go forward.
The more he strove to flee, themselves in ambiguity and mystery, either talking very little or talking
the more firmly love forced only of surface matters, hinting at a depth of character you can never reach.
him back. The harder he
When Marlene Dietrich entered a room, or arrived at a party, all eyes in-
struggled to escape, love
evitably turned to her. First there were her startling clothes, chosen to make
drew him back more firmly.
heads turn. Then there was her air of nonchalant indifference. Men, and
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
women too, became obsessed with her, thinking of her long after other
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY A.T.
HATTO memories of the evening had faded. Remember: that first impression, that

[PAGE 221]
Send Mixed Signals • 193
entrance, is critical. To show too much desire for attention is to signal inse-
curity, and will often drive people away; play it too cold and disinterested,
on the other hand, and no one will bother coming near. The trick is
to combine the two attitudes at the same moment. It is the essence of
coquetry.
Perhaps you have a reputation for a particular quality, which im-
mediately comes to mind when people see you. You will better hold their
attention by suggesting that behind this reputation some other quality lies
lurking. No one had a darker, more sinful reputation than Lord Byron.
What drove women wild was that behind his somewhat cold and disdainful
exterior, they could sense that he was actually quite romantic, even spiri-
tual. Byron played this up with his melancholic airs and occasional kind
deed. Transfixed and confused, many women thought that they could be
the one to lead him back to goodness, to make him a faithful lover. Once a
woman entertained such a thought, she was completely under his spell. It is
not difficult to create such a seductive effect. Should you be known as emi-
nently rational, say, hint at something irrational. Johannes, the narrator in
Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, first treats the young Cordelia with
businesslike politeness, as his reputation would lead her to expect. Yet she
very soon overhears him making remarks that hint at a wild, poetic streak
in his character; and she is excited and intrigued.
These principles have applications far beyond sexual seduction. To hold
the attention of a broad public, to seduce them into thinking about you,
you need to mix your signals. Display too much of one quality—even if it
is a noble one, like knowledge or efficiency—and people will feel that you
lack humanity. We are all complex and ambiguous, full of contradictory
impulses; if you show only one side, even if it is your good side, you will
wear on people's nerves. They will suspect you are a hypocrite. Mahatma
Gandhi, a saintly figure, openly confessed to feelings of anger and venge-
fulness. John F. Kennedy, the most seductive American public figure of
modern times, was a walking paradox: an East Coast aristocrat with a love
of the common man, an obviously masculine man—a war hero—with a
vulnerability you could sense underneath, an intellectual who loved popu-
lar culture. People were drawn to Kennedy like the steel filings in Wilde's
fable. A bright surface may have a decorative charm, but what draws your
eye into a painting is a depth of field, an inexpressible ambiguity, a surreal
complexity.

[PAGE 222]
194 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Theater Curtain. Onstage, the curtain's heavy deep-red
folds attract your eye with their hypnotic surface. But what really
fascinates and draws you in is what you think might be happen-
ing behind the curtain—the light peeking through, the
suggestion of a secret, something about to happen.
You feel the thrill of a voyeur about to
watch a performance.
Reversal
The complexity you signal to other people will only affect them prop-
erly if they have the capacity to enjoy a mystery. Some people like
things simple, and lack the patience to pursue a person who confuses them.
They prefer to be dazzled and overwhelmed. The great Belle Epoque cour-
tesan known as La Belle Otero would work a complex magic on artists and
political figures who fell for her, but in dealing with the more uncompli-
cated, sensual male she would astound them with spectacle and beauty.
When meeting a woman for the first time, Casanova might dress in the
most fantastic outfit, with jewels and brilliant colors to dazzle the eye; he
would use the target's reaction to gauge whether or not she would demand
a more complicated seduction. Some of his victims, particularly young
girls, needed no more than the glittering and spellbinding appearance,
which was really what they wanted, and the seduction would stay on that
level.
Everything depends on your target: do not bother creating depth for
people who are insensitive to it, or who may even be put off or disturbed
by it. You can recognize such types by their preference for the simpler plea-
sures in life, their lack of patience for a more nuanced story. With them,
keep it simple.

[PAGE 223]
Appear to Be an Object of Desire
—Create Triangles
Few are drawn to the person whom others avoid or ne-
glect; people gather around those who have already at-
tracted interest. We want what other people want. To draw
your victims closer and make them hungry to possess you, you
must create an aura of desirability—of being wanted and
courted by many. It will become a point of vanity for them to
be the preferred object of your attention, to win you away from
a crowd of admirers. Manufacture the illusion of popularity
by surrounding yourself with members of the opposite
sex—friends, former lovers, present suitors. Create tri-
angles that stimulate rivalry and raise your value.
Build a reputation that precedes you: if many
have succumbed to your charms,
there must be a reason.

[PAGE 224]


[PAGE 225]
Creating Triangles
One evening in 1882, the thirty-two-year-old Prussian philosopher
Paul Rée, living in Rome at the time, visited the house of an older
woman who ran a salon for writers and artists. Rée noticed a newcomer
there, a twenty-one-year-old Russian girl named Lou von Salomé, who
had come to Rome on holiday with her mother. Rée introduced himself
and they began a conversation that lasted well into the night. Her ideas
Let me tell you about a
about God and morality were like his own; she talked with such intensity, gentleman I once knew
yet at the same time her eyes seemed to flirt with him. Over the next few who, although he was of
pleasing appearance and
days Rée and Salomé took long walks through the city. Intrigued by her
modest behavior, and also a
mind yet confused by the emotions she aroused, he wanted to spend more very capable warrior, was
time with her. Then, one day, she startled him with a proposition: she not so outstanding as
regards any of these
knew he was a close friend of the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, then
qualities that there were
also visiting Italy. The three of them, she said, should travel together—no, not to be found many who
actually live together, in a kind of philosophers' menage a trois. A fierce were his equal and even
better. However, as luck
critic of Christian morals, Rée found this idea delightful. He wrote to his
would have it, a certain
friend about Salomé, describing how desperate she was to meet him. After
lady fell very deeply in love
a few such letters, Nietzsche hurried to Rome. with him. She saw that he
Rée had made this invitation to please Salomé, and to impress her; hefelt the same way, and as
her love grew day by day,
also wanted to see if Nietzsche shared his enthusiasm for the young girl's
there not being any way for
ideas. But as soon as Nietzsche arrived, something unpleasant happened: them to speak to each
the great philosopher, who had always been a loner, was obviously smitten other, she revealed her
sentiments to another lady,
with Salomé. Instead of the three of them sharing intellectual conversa-
who she hoped would be of
tions together, Nietzsche seemed to be conspiring to get the girl alone. service to her in this affair.
When Rée caught glimpses of Nietzsche and Salomé talking without in- Now this lady neither in
rank nor beauty was a whit
cluding him, he felt shivers of jealousy. Forget about some philosophers'
inferior to the first; and it
menage a trois: Salomé was his, he had discovered her, and he would not came about that when she
share her, even with his good friend. Somehow he had to get her alone. heard the young man
(whom she had never seen)
Only then could he woo and win her.
spoken of so affectionately,
Madame Salomé had planned to escort her daughter back to Russia, and came to realize that
but Salomé wanted to stay in Europe. Rée intervened, offering to travel the other woman, whom
with the Salomés to Germany and introduce them to his own mother, she knew was extremely
discreet and intelligent,
who, he promised, would look after the girl and act as a chaperone. (Rée
loved him beyond words,
knew that his mother would be a lax guardian at best.) Madame Salomé she straight away began to
agreed to this proposal, but Nietzsche was harder to shake: he decided to imagine that he must be
the most handsome, the
join them on their northward journey to Rée's home in Prussia. At one
wisest, the most discreet of
point in the trip, Nietzsche and Salomé took a walk by themselves, and men, and, in short, the
197

[PAGE 226]
198 • The Art of Seduction
man most worthy of her when they came back, Rée had the feeling that something physical had
love in all the world. So, happened between them. His blood boiled; Salomé was slipping from his
never having set eyes on
grasp.
him, she fell in love with
him so passionately that Finally the group split up, the mother returning to Russia, Nietzsche to
she set out to win him not his summer place in Tautenburg, Rée and Salomé staying behind at Rée's
for her friend but for
home. But Salomé did not stay long: she accepted an invitation of Nietz-
herself And in this she
sche's to visit him, unchaperoned, in Tautenburg. In her absence Rée was
succeeded with little effort,
for indeed she was a consumed with doubts and anger. He wanted her more than ever, and was
woman more to be wooed prepared to redouble his efforts. When she finally came back, Rée vented
than to do the wooing.
his bitterness, railing against Nietzsche, criticizing his philosophy, and ques-
And now listen to the
splendid sequel: not long tioning his motives toward the girl. But Salomé took Nietzsche's side. Rée
afterward it happened that was in despair; he felt he had lost her for good. Yet a few days later she sur-
a letter which she had
prised him again: she had decided she wanted to live with him, and with
written to her lover fell into
the hands of another him alone.
woman of comparable At last Rée had what he had wanted, or so he thought. The couple set-
rank, charm, and beauty;
tled in Berlin, where they rented an apartment together. But now, to Rée's
and since she, like most
dismay, the old pattern repeated. They lived together but Salomé was
women, was curious and
eager to learn secrets, she courted on all sides by young men. The darling of Berlin's intellectuals,
opened the letter and read who admired her independent spirit, her refusal to compromise, she was
it. Realizing that it was
constantly surrounded by a harem of men, who referred to her as "Her Ex-
written from the depths of
passion, in the most loving cellency." Once again Rée found himself competing for her attention.
and ardent terms, she was Driven to despair, he left her a few years later, and eventually committed
at first moved with
suicide.
compassion, for she knew
very well from whom the In 1911, Sigmund Freud met Salomé (now known as Lou Andreas-
letter came and to whom it Salomé) at a conference in Germany. She wanted to devote herself to the
was addressed; then,
psychoanalytical movement, she said, and Freud found her enchanting, al-
however, such was the
power of the words she though, like everyone else, he knew the story of her infamous affair with
read, turning them over in Nietzsche (see page 46, "The Dandy"). Salomé had no background in psy-
her mind and considering choanalysis or in therapy of any kind, but Freud admitted her into the in-
what kind of man it must
ner circle of followers who attended his private lectures. Soon after she
be who had been able to
arouse such great love, she joined the circle, one of Freud's most promising and brilliant students, Dr.
at once began to fall in love Victor Tausk, sixteen years younger than Salomé, fell in love with her. Sa-
with him herself; and the
lomé's relationship with Freud had been platonic, but he had grown ex-
letter was without doubt far
more effective than if the tremely fond of her. He was depressed when she missed a lecture, and
young man had himself would send her notes and flowers. Her involvement in a love affair with
written it to her. And just
Tausk made him intensely jealous, and he began to compete for her atten-
as it sometimes happens
that the poison prepared for tion. Tausk had been like a son to him, but the son was threatening to steal
a prince kills the one who the father's platonic lover. Soon, however, Salomé left Tausk. Now her
tastes his food, so that poor
friendship with Freud was stronger than ever, and so it lasted until her
woman, in her greediness,
death, in 1937.
drank the love potion
prepared for another. What
more is there to say? The
affair was no secret, and
Interpretation. Men did not just fall in love with Lou Andreas-Salomé;
things so developed that
many other women besides, they were overwhelmed with the desire to possess her, to wrest her away
partly to spite the others from others, to be the proud owner of her body and spirit. They rarely saw
and partly to follow their
her alone; she always in some way surrounded herself with other men.

[PAGE 227]
Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles • 199
When she saw that Rée was interested in her, she mentioned her desire to example, put every care
meet Nietzsche. This inflamed Rée, and made him want to marry her and and effort into winning this
man's love, squabbling over
to keep him for himself, but she insisted on meeting his friend. His letters
it for a while as boys do
to Nietzsche betrayed his desire for this woman, and this in turn kindled for cherries.
Nietzsche's own desire for her, even before he had met her. Every time one
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE,
of the two men was alone with her, the other was in the background. THE BOOK OFTHE COURTIER,
Then, later on, most of the men who met her knew of the infamous TRANSLATED BY GEORGE BULL
Nietzsche affair, and this only increased their desire to possess her, to com-
pete with Nietzsche's memory. Freud's affection for her, similarly, turned
into potent desire when he had to vie with Tausk for her attention. Salomé Most of the time we prefer
one thing to another
was intelligent and attractive enough on her own account; but her constant
because that is what our
strategy of imposing a triangle of relationships on her suitors made her de-
friends already prefer or
sirability intense. And while they fought over her, she had the power, being because that object has
desired by all and subject to none. marked social significance.
Adults, when they are
Our desire for another person almost always involves social considera-
hungry, are just like
tions: we are attracted to those who are attractive to other people. We want children in that they seek
to possess them and steal them away. You can believe all the sentimental out the foods that others
take. In their love affairs,
nonsense you want to about desire, but in the end, much of it has to do
they seek out the man or
with vanity and greed. Do not whine and moralize about people's selfish- woman whom others find
ness, but simply use it to your advantage. The illusion that you are desired attractive and abandon
those who are not sought
by others will make you more attractive to your victims than your beautiful
after. When we say of a
face or your perfect body. And the most effective way to create that illusion man or woman that he or
is to create a triangle: impose another person between you and your victim, she is desirable, what we
really mean is that others
and subtly make your victim aware of how much this other person wants
desire them. It is not that
you. The third point on the triangle does not have to be just one person:
they have some particular
surround yourself with admirers, reveal your past conquests—in other quality, but because they
words, envelop yourself in an aura of desirability. Make your targets com- conform to some currently
modish model.
pete with your past and your present. They will long to possess you all to
themselves, giving you great power for as long as you elude their grasp. Fail —SERGE MOSCOVICI, THE AGE
OF THE CROWD:A HISTORICAL
to make yourself an object of desire right from the start, and you will end
TREATISE ON MASS PSYCHOL-
up the sorry slave to the whims of your lovers—they will abandon you the OGY, TRANSLATED BY J. C.
moment they lose interest. WHITEHOUSE
[A person] will desire any object so long as he is convinced
that it is desired by another person whom he admires. It will be greatly to your
advantage to entertain the
—RENÉ GIRARD lady you would win with
an account of the number
of women who are in love
with you, and of the
Keys to Seduction
decided advances which
they have made to you; for
We are social creatures, and are immensely influenced by the tastes and this will not only prove
that you are a great favorite
desires of other people. Imagine a large social gathering. You see a
with the ladies, and a man
man alone, whom nobody talks to for any length of time, and who is wan- of true honor, but it will
dering around without company; isn't there a kind of self-fulfilling isola- convince her that she may
have the honor of being
tion about him? Why is he alone, why is he avoided? There has to be a
enrolled in the same list,
reason. Until someone takes pity on this man and starts up a conversation and of being praised in the

[PAGE 228]
200 • The Art of Seduction
same way, in the presence with him, he will look unwanted and unwantable. But over there, in an-
of your other female other corner, is a woman surrounded by people. They laugh at her remarks,
friends. This will greatly
and as they laugh, others join the group, attracted by its gaiety. When she
delight her, and you need
not be surprised if she moves around, people follow. Her face is glowing with attention. There has
testifies her admiration of to be a reason.
your character by throwing In both cases, of course, there doesn't actually have to be a reason at
her arms around your neck
all. The neglected man may have quite charming qualities, supposing you
on the spot.
ever talk to him; but most likely you won't. Desirability is a social illu-
—LOLA MONTEZ, THE ARTS
sion. Its source is less what you say or do, or any kind of boasting or self-
AND SECRETS OF BEAUTY, WITH
HINTS TO GENTLEMEN ON THE advertisement, than the sense that other people desire you. To turn your
ART OF FASCINATING
targets' interest into something deeper, into desire, you must make them
see you as a person whom others cherish and covet. Desire is both imitative
(we like what others like) and competitive (we want to take away from oth-
[René] Girard's mimetic
ers what they have). As children, we wanted to monopolize the attention of
desire occurs when an
individual subject desires a parent, to draw it away from other siblings. This sense of rivalry pervades
an object because it is human desire, repeating throughout our lives. Make people compete for
desired by another subject,
your attention, make them see you as sought after by everyone else. The
here designated as the
aura of desirability will envelop you.
rival: desire is modeled on
the wishes or actions of Your admirers can be friends or even suitors. Call it the harem effect.
another. Philippe Lacoue- Pauline Bonaparte, sister of Napoleon, raised her value in men's eyes by al-
Labarthe says that "the
ways having a group of worshipful men around her at balls and parties. If
basic hypothesis upon
which rests Girard's famous she went for a walk, it was never with one man, always with two or three.
analysis [is that] every Perhaps these men were simply friends, or even just props and hangers-on;
desire is the desire of the
the sight of them was enough to suggest that she was prized and desired, a
other (and not immediately
desire of an object), every woman worth fighting over. Andy Warhol, too, surrounded himself with
structure of desire is the most glamorous, interesting people he could find. To be part of his in-
triangular (including the
ner circle meant that you were desirable as well. By placing himself in the
other—mediator or
model—whose desire desire middle but keeping himself aloof from it all, he made everyone compete
imitates), every desire is for his attention. He stirred people's desire to possess him by holding back.
thus from its inception
Practices like these not only stimulate competitive desires, they take aim
tapped by hatred and
at people's prime weakness: their vanity and self-esteem. We can endure
rivalry; in short, the origin
of desire is mimesis— feeling that another person has more talent, or more money, but the sense
mimeticism—and no that a rival is more desirable than we are—that is unbearable. In the early
desire is ever forged which
eighteenth century, the Duke de Richelieu, a great rake, managed to se-
does not desire forthwith
the death or disappearance duce a young woman who was rather religious but whose husband, a dolt,
of the model or exemplary was often away. He then proceeded to seduce her upstairs neighbor, a
character which gave rise
young widow. When the two women discovered that he was going from
to it.
one to the other in the same night, they confronted him. A lesser man
—JAMES MANDRELL,
would have fled, but not the duke; he understood the dynamic of vanity
DON JUAN AND THE POINT OF
HONOR and desire. Neither woman wanted to feel that he preferred the other. And
so he managed to arrange a little menage a trois, knowing that now they
would struggle between themselves to be the favorite. When people's vani-
ty is at risk, you can make them do whatever you want. According to
Stendhal, if there is a woman you are interested in, pay attention to her sis-
ter. That will stir a triangular desire.
Your reputation—your illustrious past as a seducer—is an effective way

[PAGE 229]
Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles • 201
of creating an aura of desirability. Women threw themselves at Errol Flynn's It's annoying that our new
feet, not because of his handsome face, and certainly not because of his acquaintance likes the boy.
But aren't the best things
acting skills, but because of his reputation. They knew that other women
in life free to all? The sun
had found him irresistible. Once he had established that reputation, he did
shines on everyone. The
not have to chase women anymore; they came to him. Men who believe moon, accompanied by
that a rakish reputation will make women fear or distrust them, and should countless stars, leads even
the beasts to pasture. What
be played down, are quite wrong. On the contrary, it makes them more at-
can you think of lovelier
tractive. The virtuous Duchess de Montpensier, the Grande Mademoiselle of than water? But it flows
seventeenth-century France, began by enjoying a friendship with the rake for the whole world. Is love
alone then something
Lauzun, but a troubling thought soon occurred to her: if a man with
furtive rather than
Lauzun's past did not see her as a possible lover, something had to be wrong something to be gloried in?
with her. This anxiety eventually pushed her into his arms. To be part of a Exactly, that's just it—I
don't want any of the good
great seducer's club of conquests can be a matter of vanity and pride. We
things of life unless people
are happy to be in such company, to have our name broadcast as this man or
are envious of them.
woman's lover. Your own reputation may not be so alluring, but you must
—PETRONIUS, THE SATYRICON,
find a way to suggest to your victim that others, many others, have found TRANSLATED BY J. P. SULLIVAN
you desirable. It is reassuring. There is nothing like a restaurant full of
empty tables to persuade you not to go in.
A variation on the triangle strategy is the use of contrasts: careful ex-
ploitation of people who are dull or unattractive may enhance your desir-
ability by comparison. At a social affair, for instance, make sure that your
target has to chat with the most boring person available. Come to the res-
cue and your target will be delighted to see you. In The Seducer's Diary, by
Søren Kierkegaard, Johannes has designs on the innocent young Cordelia.
Knowing that his friend Edward is hopelessly shy and dull, he encourages
this man to court her; a few weeks of Edward's attentions will make her
eyes wander in search of someone else, anyone else, and Johannes will make
sure that they settle on him. Johannes chose to strategize and maneuver, but
almost any social environment will contain contrasts you can make use of
almost naturally. The seventeenth-century English actress Nell Gwyn be-
came the main mistress of King Charles II because her humor and unaffect-
edness made her that much more desirable among the many stiff and
pretentious ladies of Charles's court. When the Shanghai actress Jiang Qing
met Mao Zedong, in 1937, she did not have to do much to seduce him;
the other women in his mountain camp in Yenan dressed like men, and
were decidedly unfeminine. The sight alone of Jiang was enough to seduce
Mao, who soon left his wife for her. To make use of contrasts, either de-
velop and display those attractive attributes (humor, vivacity, and so on) that
are the scarcest in your own social group, or choose a group in which your
natural qualities are rare, and will shine.
The use of contrasts has vast political ramifications, for a political figure
must also seduce and seem desirable. Learn to play up the qualities that your
rivals lack. Peter II, czar in eighteenth-century Russia, was arrogant and ir-
responsible, so his wife, Catherine the Great, did all she could to seem
modest and dependable. When Vladimir Lenin returned to Russia in 1917
after Czar Nicholas II had been deposed, he made a show of decisiveness

[PAGE 230]
202 • The Art of Seduction
and discipline—precisely what no other leader had at the time. In the
American presidential race of 1980, the irresoluteness of Jimmy Carter
made the single-mindedness of Ronald Reagan look desirable. Contrasts
are eminently seductive because they do not depend on your own words or
self-advertisements. The public reads them unconsciously, and sees what it
wants to see.
Finally, appearing to be desired by others will raise your value, but often
how you carry yourself can influence this as well. Do not let your targets
see you so often; keep your distance, seem unattainable, out of their reach.
An object that is rare and hard to obtain is generally more prized.
Symbol: The Trophy.
What makes you want to win the trophy, and to see it as
something worth having, is the sight of the other competitors. Some,
out of a spirit of kindness, may want to reward everyone for trying, but
the Trophy then loses its value. It must represent not only
your victory but everyone else's defeat.
Reversal
T
here is no reversal. It is essential to appear desirable in the eyes of
others.

[PAGE 231]
Create a Need—
Stir Anxiety and Discontent
A perfectly satisfied
person cannot be seduced. Tension and
disharmony must be instilled in your targets' minds. Stir
within them feelings of discontent, an unhappiness with their
circumstances and with themselves: their life lacks adventure, they
have strayed from the ideals of their youth, they have become boring.
The feelings of inadequacy that you create will give you space to in-
sinuate yourself, to make them see you as the answer to their
problems. Pain and anxiety are the proper precursors to
pleasure. Learn to manufacture the need
that you can fill.

[PAGE 232]


[PAGE 233]
Opening a Wound
In the coal-mining town of Eastwood, in central England, David Herbert
Lawrence was considered something of a strange lad. Pale and delicate,
he had no time for games or boyish pursuits, but was interested in litera-
ture; and he preferred the company of girls, who made up most of his
friends. Lawrence often visited the Chambers family, who had been his
neighbors until they moved out of Eastwood to a farm not far away. He
liked to study with the Chambers sisters, particularly Jessie; she was shy and No one can fall in love if
he is even partially satisfied
serious, and getting her to open up and confide in him was a pleasurable
with what he has or who
challenge. Jessie grew quite attached to Lawrence over the years, and they he is. The experience of
became good friends. falling in love originates in
an extreme depression, an
One day in 1906, Lawrence, twenty-one at the time, did not show up
inability to find something
at the usual hour for his study session with Jessie. He finally arrived much that has value in everyday
later, in a mood she had never seen before—preoccupied and quiet. Now it life. The "symptom" of
the predisposition to fall in
was her turn to make him open up. Finally he talked: he felt she was getting
love is not the conscious
too close to him. What about her future? Whom would she marry? Cer- desire to do so, the intense
tainly not him, he said, for they were just friends. But it was unfair of him desire to enrich our lives; it
is the profound sense of
to keep her from seeing others. They should of course remain friends and
being worthless and of
have their talks, but maybe less often. When he finished and left, she felt a
having nothing that is
strange emptiness. She had yet to think much about love or marriage. Sud- valuable and the shame of
denly she had doubts. What would her future be? Why wasn't she thinking not having it. . . . For this
reason, falling in love
about it? She felt anxious and upset, without understanding why.
occurs more frequently
Lawrence continued to visit, but everything had changed. He criticized among young people, since
her for this and that. She wasn't very physical. What kind of wife would they are profoundly
uncertain, unsure of their
she make anyway? A man needed more from a woman than just talk. He
worth, and often ashamed
likened her to a nun. They began to see each other less often. When, some of themselves. The same
time later, Lawrence accepted a teaching position at a school outside Lon- thing applies to people of
other ages when they lose
don, she felt part relieved to be rid of him for a while. But when he said
something in their lives—
goodbye to her, and intimated that it might be for the last time, she broke when their youth ends or
down and cried. Then he started sending her weekly letters. He would when they start to grow
old.
write about girls he was seeing; maybe one of them would be his wife. Fi-
nally, at his behest, she visited him in London. They got along well, as in —FRANCESCO ALBERONI,
FALLING IN LOVE, TRANSLATED
the old times, but he continued to badger her about her future, picking at
BY LAWRENCE VENUTI
that old wound. At Christmas he was back in Eastwood, and when he vis-
ited her he seemed exultant. He had decided that it was Jessie he should
marry, that he had in fact been attracted to her all along. They should keep
it quiet for a while; although his writing career was taking off (his first
205

[PAGE 234]
206 • The Art of Seduction
"What can Love be novel was about to be published), he needed to make more money. Caught
then?" I said. "A off guard by this sudden announcement, and overwhelmed with happiness,
mortal?" "Far from it."
Jessie agreed to everything, and they became lovers.
"Well, what?" "As in my
previous examples, he is Soon, however, the familiar pattern repeated: criticisms, breakups, an-
half-way between mortal nouncements that he was engaged to another girl. This only deepened his
and immortal." What sort
hold on her. It was not until 1912 that she finally decided never to see him
of being is he then,
again, disturbed by his portrayal of her in the autobiographical novel Sons
Diotima?" "He is a great
spirit, Socrates; everything and Lovers. But Lawrence remained a lifelong obsession for her.
that is of the nature of a In 1913, a young English woman named Ivy Low, who had read
spirit is half-god and half-
Lawrence's novels, began to correspond with him, her letters gushing with
man." . . . "Who are his
parents?" I asked. "That admiration. By now Lawrence was married, to a German woman, the
is rather a long story," she Baroness Frieda von Richthofen. To Low's surprise, though, he invited her
answered, "but I will tell
to visit him and his wife in Italy. She knew he was probably something of a
you. On the day that
Aphrodite was born the Don Juan, but was eager to meet him, and accepted his invitation.
gods were feasting, among Lawrence was not what she had expected: his voice was high-pitched, his
them Contrivance the son
eyes were piercing, and there was something vaguely feminine about him.
of Invention; and after
dinner, seeing that a party Soon they were taking walks together, with Lawrence confiding in Low.
was in progress, Poverty She felt that they were becoming friends, which delighted her. Then sud-
came to beg and stood at denly, just before she was to leave, he launched into a series of criticisms of
the door. Now Contrivance
her—she was so unspontaneous, so predictable, less human being than ro-
was drunk with nectar—
wine, I may say, had not bot. Devastated by this unexpected attack, she nevertheless had to agree—
yet been discovered—and what he had said was true. What could he have seen in her in the first
went out into the garden of
place? Who was she anyway? Low left Italy feeling empty—but then
Zeus, and was overcome by
sleep. So Poverty, thinking Lawrence continued to write to her, as if nothing had happened. She soon
to alleviate her wretched realized that she had fallen hopelessly in love with him, despite everything
condition by bearing a child
he had said to her. Or was it not despite what he had said, but because of it?
to Contrivance, lay with
him and conceived Love. In 1914, the writer John Middleton-Murry received a letter from
Since Love was begotten on Lawrence, a good friend of his. In the letter, out of nowhere, Lawrence
Aphrodite's birthday, and
criticized Middleton-Murry for being passionless and not gallant enough
since he has also an innate
with his wife, the novelist Katherine Mansfield. Middleton-Murry later
passion for the beautiful,
and so for the beauty of wrote, "I had never felt for a man before what his letter made me feel for
Aphrodite herself, he him. It was a new thing, a unique thing, in my experience; and it was to re-
became her follower and
main unique." He felt that beneath Lawrence's criticisms lay some weird
servant. Again, having
Contrivance for his father kind of affection. Whenever he saw Lawrence from then on, he felt a
and Poverty for his strange physical attraction that he could not explain.
mother, he bears the
following character. He is
always poor, and, far from
being sensitive and Interpretation. The number of women, and of men, who fell under
beautiful, as most people
Lawrence's spell is astonishing given how unpleasant he could be. In almost
imagine, he is hard and
weather-beaten, shoeless every case the relationship began in friendship—with frank talks, exchanges
and homeless, always of confidences, a spiritual bond. Then, invariably, he would suddenly turn
sleeping out for want of a against them, voicing harsh personal criticisms. He would know them well
bed, on the ground, on
by that time, and the criticisms were often quite accurate, and hit a nerve.
doorsteps, and in the street.
So far he takes after his This would inevitably trigger confusion in his victims, and a sense of anxi-
mother and lives in want. ety, a feeling that something was wrong with them. Jolted out of their usual
But, being also his father's
sense of normality, they would feel divided inside. With half of their minds

[PAGE 235]
Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent • 207
they wondered why he was doing this, and felt he was unfair; with the son, he schemes to get for
other half, they believed it was all true. Then, in those moments of self- himself whatever is
beautiful and good; he is
doubt, they would get a letter or a visit from him in which he was his old
bold and forward and
charming self.
strenuous, always devising
Now they saw him differently Now they were weak and vulnerable, in tricks like a cunning
need of something; and he would seem so strong. Now he drew them to huntsman."
him, feelings of friendship turning into affection and desire. Once they felt —PLATO, SYMPOSIUM,
uncertain about themselves, they were susceptible to falling in love. TRANSLATED BY WALTER
HAMILTON
Most of us protect ourselves from the harshness of life by succumbing
to routines and patterns, by closing ourselves off from others. But underly-
ing these habits is a tremendous sense of insecurity and defensiveness. We We are all like pieces of the
feel we are not really living. The seducer must pick at this wound and bring coins that children break in
half for keepsakes—
these semiconscious thoughts into full awareness. This was what Lawrence
making two out of one,
did: his sudden, brutally unexpected jabs would hit people at their weak like the flatfish—and each
spot. of us is forever seeking the
half that will tally with
Although Lawrence had great success with his frontal approach, it is
himself . . . And so all
often better to stir thoughts of inadequacy and uncertainty indirectly, by this to-do is a relic of that
hinting at comparisons to yourself or to others, and by insinuating some- original state of ours when
we were whole, and now,
how that your victims' lives are less grand than they had imagined. You
when we are longing for
want them to feel at war with themselves, torn in two directions, and anx- and following after that
ious about it. Anxiety, a feeling of lack and need, is the precursor of all de- primeval wholeness, we say
we are in love.
sire. These jolts in the victim's mind create space for you to insinuate your
poison, the siren call of adventure or fulfillment that will make them follow —ARISTOPHANES'S SPEECH IN
PLATO'S SYMPOSIUM, QUOTED IN
you into your web. Without anxiety and a sense of lack there can be no
JAMES MANDRELL, DON JUAN
seduction. AND THE POINT OF HONOR
Desire and love have for their object things or qualities
which a man does not at present possess but which he Don John: Well met,
pretty lass! What! Are
lacks.
there such handsome
—SOCRATES Creatures as you amongst
these Fields, these Trees,
and Rocks? • Charlotta: I
am as you see, Sir. • Don
Keys to Seduction
John: Are you of this
Village? • Charlotta: Yes,
Everyone wears a mask in society; we pretend to be more sure of our- Sir. • Don John: What's
your name? • Charlotta:
selves than we are. We do not want other people to glimpse that
Charlotta, Sir, at your
doubting self within us. In truth, our egos and personalities are much more Service. • Don John: Ah
fragile than they appear to be; they cover up feelings of confusion and what a fine Person 'tis!
What piercing Eyes! •
emptiness. As a seducer, you must never mistake a person's appearance for
Charlotta: Sir, you make
the reality. People are always susceptible to being seduced, because in fact me ashamed. . . . • Don
everyone lacks a sense of completeness, feels something missing deep in- John: Pretty Charlotta,
you are not marry'd, are
side. Bring their doubts and anxieties to the surface and they can be led and
you? • Charlotta: No, Sir,
lured to follow you. but I am soon to be, with
No one can see you as someone to follow or fall in love with unless Pierrot, son to Goody
Simonetta. • Don John:
they first reflect on themselves somehow, and on what they are missing. Be-
What! Shou'd such a one
fore the seduction proceeds, you must place a mirror in front of them in as you be Wife to a

[PAGE 236]
208 • The Art of Seduction
Peasant! No, no; that's a which they glimpse that inner emptiness. Made aware of a lack, they now
profanation of so much can focus on you as the person who can fill that empty space. Remember:
Beauty. You was not born
most of us are lazy. To relieve our feelings of boredom or inadequacy on
to live in a Village. You
our own takes too much effort; letting someone else do the job is both
certainly deserve a better
Fortune, and Heaven, easier and more exciting. The desire to have someone fill up our emptiness
which knows it well, is the weakness on which all seducers prey. Make people anxious about the
brought me hither on
future, make them depressed, make them question their identity, make
purpose to hinder this
Marriage and do justice to them sense the boredom that gnaws at their life. The ground is prepared.
your Charms; for in short, The seeds of seduction can be sown.
fair Charlotta, I love you
In Plato's dialogue Symposium—the West's oldest treatise on love, and a
with all my Heart, and if
you'll consent I'll deliver text that has had a determining influence on our ideas of desire—the cour-
you from this miserable tesan Diotima explains to Socrates the parentage of Eros, the god of love.
Place, and put you in the
Eros's father was Contrivance, or Cunning, and his mother was Poverty, or
Condition you deserve.
This Love is doubtless Need. Eros takes after his parents: he is constantly in need, which he is con-
sudden, but 'tis an Effect of stantly contriving to fill. As the god of love, he knows that love cannot be
your great Beauty. I love induced in another person unless they too feel need. And that is what his
you as much in a quarter of
arrows do: piercing people's flesh, they make them feel a lack, an ache, a
an Hour as I shou'd
another in six Months. hunger. This is the essence of your task as a seducer. Like Eros, you must
create a wound in your victim, aiming at their soft spot, the chink in their
—MOLIÈRE, DON JOHN; OR,
THE LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY self-esteem. If they are stuck in a rut, make them feel it more deeply, "in-
JOHN OZELL, IN OSCAR nocently" bringing it up and talking about it. What you want is a wound,
MANDEL, ED., THE THEATRE OF
DON JUAN an insecurity you can expand a little, an anxiety that can best be relieved by
involvement with another person, namely you. They must feel the wound
before they fall in love. Notice how Lawrence stirred anxiety, always hitting
For I stand tonight facing at his victims' weak spot: for Jessie Chambers, her physical coldness; for Ivy
west on what was once the
Low, her lack of spontaneity; for Middleton-Murry, his lack of gallantry.
last frontier. From the
lands that stretch three Cleopatra got Julius Caesar to sleep with her the first night he met her,
thousand miles behind me, but the real seduction, the one that made him her slave, began later. In their
the pioneers of old gave up
ensuing conversations she talked repeatedly of Alexander the Great, the
their safety, their comfort,
and sometimes their lives to hero from whom she was supposedly descended. No one could compare to
build a new world here in him. By implication, Caesar was made to feel inferior. Understanding that
the West. They were not
beneath his bravado Caesar was insecure, Cleopatra awakened in him an
the captives of their own
doubts, the prisoners of anxiety, a hunger to prove his greatness. Once he felt this way he was easily
their own price tags. Their further seduced. Doubts about his masculinity was his tender spot.
motto was not "every man
When Caesar was assassinated, Cleopatra turned her sights on Mark
for himself—but "all for
the common cause." They Antony, one of Caesar's successors in the leadership of Rome. Antony
were determined to make loved pleasure and spectacle, and his tastes were crude. She appeared to him
that new world strong and first on her royal barge, then wined and dined and banqueted him. Every-
free, to overcome its
thing was geared to suggest to him the superiority of the Egyptian way of
hazards and its hardships,
to conquer the enemies that life over the Roman, at least when it came to pleasure. The Romans were
threatened from without boring and unsophisticated by comparison. And once Antony was made to
and within. . . . • Today
feel how much he was missing in spending his time with his dull soldiers
some would say that those
struggles are all over—that and his matronly Roman wife, he could be made to see Cleopatra as the in-
all the horizons have been carnation of all that was exciting. He became her slave.
explored, that all the
This is the lure of the exotic. In your role of seducer, try to position
battles have been won, that
there is no longer an yourself as coming from outside, as a stranger of sorts. You represent

[PAGE 237]
Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent • 209
change, difference, a breakup of routines. Make your victims feel that by American frontier. • But I
comparison their lives are boring and their friends less interesting than they trust that no one in this
vast assemblage will agree
had thought. Lawrence made his targets feel personally inadequate; if you
with those sentiments. . . .
find it hard to be so brutal, concentrate on their friends, their circum-
• . . . I tell you the New
stances, the externals of their lives. There are many legends of Don Juan, Frontier is here, whether
but they often describe him seducing a village girl by making her feel that we seek it or not. . . . It
would be easier to shrink
her life is horribly provincial. He, meanwhile, wears glittering clothes and
back from that frontier, to
has a noble bearing. Strange and exotic, he is always from somewhere else. look to the safe mediocrity
First she feels the boredom of her life, then she sees him as her salvation. of the past, to be lulled by
good intentions and high
Remember: people prefer to feel that if their life is uninteresting, it not be-
rhetoric—and those who
cause of themselves but because of their circumstances, the dull people prefer that course should
they know, the town into which they were born. Once you make them feel not cast their votes for me,
regardless of party. • But I
the lure of the exotic, seduction is easy.
believe that the times
Another devilishly seductive area to aim at is the victim's past. To grow demand invention,
old is to renounce or compromise youthful ideals, to become less sponta- innovation, imagination,
decision. I am asking each
neous, less alive in a way. This knowledge lies dormant in all of us. As a se-
of you to be new pioneers
ducer you must bring it to the surface, make it clear how far people have
on that New Frontier. My
strayed from their past goals and ideals. You, in turn, present yourself as call is to the young in
representing that ideal, as offering a chance to recapture lost youth through heart, regardless of age.
adventure—through seduction. In her later years, Queen Elizabeth I of En- —JOHN F. KENNEDY,
gland was known as a rather stern and demanding ruler. She made it a point ACCEPTANCE SPEECH AS THE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE OF THE
not to let her courtiers see anything soft or weak in her. But then Robert
DEMOCRATIC PARTY, QUOTED IN
Devereux, the second Earl of Essex, came to court. Much younger than JOHN HELLMANN, THE
KENNEDY OBSESSION: THE
the queen, the dashing Essex would often chastize her for her sourness.
AMERICAN MYTH OF JFK
The queen would forgive him—he was so exuberant and spontaneous, he
could not control himself. But his comments got under her skin; in the pres-
ence of Essex she came to remember all the youthful ideals—spiritedness,
feminine charm—that had since vanished from her life. She also felt a little The normal rhythm of life
oscillates in general between
of that girlish spirit return when she was around him. He quickly became
a mild satisfaction with
her favorite, and soon she was in love with him. Old age is constantly se- oneself and a slight
duced by youth, but first the young people must make it clear what the discomfort, originating in
the knowledge of one's
older ones are missing, how they have lost their ideals. Only then will they
personal shortcomings. We
feel that the presence of the young will let them recapture that spark, the should like to be as
rebellious spirit that age and society have conspired to repress. handsome, young, strong or
clever as other people of our
This concept has infinite applications. Corporations and politicians
acquaintance. We wish we
know that they cannot seduce their public into buying what they want could achieve as much as
them to buy, or doing what they want them to do, unless they first awaken they do, long for similar
advantages, positions, the
a sense of need and discontent. Make the masses uncertain about their
same or greater success. To
identity and you can help define it for them. It is as true of groups or na-
be delighted with oneself is
tions as it is of individuals: they cannot be seduced without being made to the exception and, often
feel some lack. Part of John F. Kennedy's election strategy in 1960 was to enough, a smoke screen
which we produce for
make Americans unhappy about the 1950s, and how far the country had
ourselves and of course for
strayed from its ideals. In talking about the 1950s, he did not mention the others. Somewhere in it is
nation's economic stability or its emergence as a superpower. Instead, he a lingering feeling of
discomfort with ourselves
implied that the period was marked by conformity, a lack of risk and ad-
and a slight self-dislike. I
venture, a loss of our frontier values. To vote for Kennedy was to embark assert that an increase of

[PAGE 238]
210 • The Art of Seduction
this spirit of discontent on a collective adventure, to go back to ideals we had given up. But before
renders a person especially anyone joined his crusade they had to be made aware of how much they
susceptible to "falling in
had lost, what was missing. A group, like an individual, can get mired in
love." . . . In most cases
this attitude of disquiet is routine, losing track of its original goals. Too much prosperity saps it of
unconscious, but in some it strength. You can seduce an entire nation by aiming at its collective insecu-
reaches the threshold of
rity, that latent sense that not everything is what it seems. Stirring dissatis-
awareness in the form of a
faction with the present and reminding people about the glorious past can
slight uneasiness, or a
stagnant dissatisfaction, or unsettle their sense of identity. Then you can be the one to redefine it—a
a realization of being upset grand seduction.
without knowing why.
—THEODOR REIK,
OF LOVE AND LUST Symbol: Cupid's Arrow. What awakens desire in the seduced is
not a soft touch or a pleasant sensation; it is a wound. The ar-
row creates a pain, an ache, a need for relief Before desire
there must be pain. Aim the arrow at the victim's
weakest spot, creating a wound that you
can open and reopen.
Reversal
If you go too far in lowering the targets' self-esteem they may feel too in-
secure to enter into your seduction. Do not be heavy-handed; like
Lawrence, always follow up the wounding attack with a soothing gesture.
Otherwise you will simply alienate them.
Charm is often a subtler and more effective route to seduction. The
Victorian Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli always made people feel better
about themselves. He deferred to them, made them the center of attention,
made them feel witty and vibrant. He was a boon to their vanity, and they
grew addicted to him. This is a kind of diffused seduction, lacking in ten-
sion and in the deep emotions that the sexual variety stirs; it bypasses peo-
ple's hunger, their need for some kind of fulfillment. But if you are subtle
and clever, it can be a way of lowering their defenses, creating an unthreat-
ening friendship. Once they are under your spell in this way, you can then
open the wound. Indeed, after Disraeli had charmed Queen Victoria and
established a friendship with her, he made her feel vaguely inadequate in
the establishment of an empire and the realization of her ideals. Everything
depends on the target. People who are riddled with insecurities may re-
quire the gentler variety. Once they feel comfortable with you, aim your
arrows.

[PAGE 239]
Master the Art of Insinuation
Making your targets feel dis-
satisfied and in need of your atten-
tion is essential, but if you are too obvious,
they will see through you and grow defensive.
There is no known defense, however,
against insinuation—the art of plant-
ing ideas in people's minds by
dropping elusive hints that
take root days later, even
appearing to them as
their own idea. Insinua-
tion is the supreme means
of influencing people. Cre-
ate a sublanguage—bold state-
ments followed by retraction and
apology, ambiguous comments, banal talk
combined with alluring glances—that enters
the target's unconscious to convey your real
meaning. Make everything suggestive.

[PAGE 240]


[PAGE 241]
Insinuating Desire
One evening in the 1770s, a young man went to the Paris Opera to
meet his lover, the Countess de . The couple had been fighting,
and he was anxious to see her again. The countess had not arrived yet at
her box, but from an adjacent one a friend of hers, Madame de T ,
called out to the young man to join her, remarking that it was an excellent
stroke of luck that they had met that evening—he must keep her company As we were about to enter
on a trip she had to take. The young man wanted urgently to see the the chamber, she stopped
countess, but Madame was charming and insistent and he agreed to go with me. "Remember," she said
gravely, "you are supposed
her. Before he could ask why or where, she quickly escorted him to her
never to have seen, never
carriage outside, which then sped off. even suspected, the
Now the young man enjoined his hostess to tell him where she was sanctuary you're about to
enter. . . ." • . . . All this
taking him. At first she just laughed, but finally she told him: to her hus-
was like an initiation rite.
band's château. The couple had been estranged, but had decided to recon- She led me by the hand
cile; her husband was a bore, however, and she felt a charming young man across a small, dark
corridor. My heart was
like himself would liven things up. The young man was intrigued: Madame
pounding as though I were
was an older woman, with a reputation for being rather formal, though he a young proselyte being put
also knew she had a lover, a marquis. Why had she chosen him for this ex- to the test before the
celebration oj the great
cursion? Her story was not quite credible. Then, as they traveled, she sug-
mysteries. . . . • "But
gested he look out the window at the passing landscape, as she was doing.
your Countess ..." she
He had to lean over toward her to do so, and just as he did, the carriage said, stopping. I was about
jolted. She grabbed his hand and fell into his arms. She stayed there for a to reply when the doors
opened; my answer was
moment, then pulled away from him rather abruptly. After an awkward si-
interrupted by admiration.
lence, she said, "Do you intend to convince me of my imprudence in your I was astonished,
regard?" He protested that the incident had been an accident and reassured delighted, I no longer
know what became of me,
her he would behave himself. In truth, however, having her in his arms had
and I began in good faith
made him think otherwise. to believe in magic. . . . In
They arrived at the château. The husband came to meet them, and the truth, I found myself in a
vast cage of mirrors on
young man expressed his admiration of the building: "What you see is
which images were so
nothing," Madame interrupted, "I must take you to Monsieur's apartment." artistically painted that
Before he could ask what she meant, the subject was quickly changed. The they produced the illusion
of all the objects they
husband was indeed a bore, but he excused himself after supper. Now
represented.
Madame and the young man were alone. She invited him to walk with her
—VIVANT DENON,"NO
in the gardens; it was a splendid evening, and as they walked, she slipped
TOMORROW," IN MICHEL FEHER,
her arm in his. She was not worried that he would take advantage of her, ED., THE LIBERTINE READER
she said, because she knew how attached he was to her good friend the
countess. They talked of other things, and then she returned to the topic of
213

[PAGE 242]
214 • The Art of Seduction
A few short years ago, in his lover: "Is she making you quite happy? Oh, I fear the contrary, and this
our native city, where fraud distresses me. . . . Are you not often the victim of her strange whims?" To
and cunning prosper more
the young man's surprise, Madame began to talk of the countess in a way
than love or loyalty, there
was a noblewoman of that made it seem that she had been unfaithful to him (which was some-
striking beauty and thing he had suspected). Madame sighed—she regretted saying such things
impeccable breeding, who about her friend, and asked him to forgive her; then, as if a new thought
was endowed by Nature
had occurred to her, she mentioned a nearby pavilion, a delightful place,
with as lofty a
temperament and shrewd full of pleasant memories. But the shame of it was, it was locked and she
an intellect as could be had no key. And yet they found their way to the pavilion, and lo and be-
found in any other woman
hold, the door had been left open. It was dark inside, but the young man
of her time. . . . • This
lady, being of gentle birth could sense that it was a place for trysts. They entered and sank onto a sofa,
and finding herself married and before he knew what had come over him, he took her in his arms.
off to a master woollen-
Madame seemed to push him away, but then gave in. Finally she came to
draper because he happened
to be very rich, was unable her senses: they must return to the house. Had he gone too far? He must
to stifle her heartfelt try to control himself.
contempt, for she was
As they strolled back to the house, Madame remarked, "What a deli-
firmly of the opinion that
cious night we've just spent." Was she referring to what had happened in
no man of low condition,
however wealthy, was the pavilion? "There is an even more charming room in the château," she
deserving of a noble wife. went on, "but I can't show you anything," implying he had been too for-
And on discovering that all
ward. She had mentioned this room ("Monsieur's apartment") several times
he was capable of despite
his massive wealth, was before; he could not imagine what could be so interesting about it, but by
distinguishing wool from now he was dying to see it and insisted she show it to him. "If you promise
cotton, supervising the
to be good," she replied, her eyes widening. Through the darkness of the
setting up of a loom, or
debating the virtues of a house she led him into the room, which, to his delight, was a kind of tem-
particular yarn with a ple of pleasure: there were mirrors on the walls, trompe l'oeil paintings
spinner-woman, she
evoking a forest scene, even a dark grotto, and a garlanded statue of Eros.
resolved that as far as it lay
within her power she Overwhelmed by the mood of the place, the young man quickly resumed
would have nothing what he had started in the pavilion, and would have lost all track of time
whatsoever to do with his if a servant had not rushed in and warned them that it was getting light
beastly caresses. Moreover
outside—Monsieur would soon be up.
she was determined to seek
her pleasure elsewhere, in They quickly separated. Later that day, as the young man prepared to
the company of one who leave, his hostess said, "Goodbye, Monsieur; I owe you so many pleasures;
seemed more worthy of her
but I have paid you with a beautiful dream. Now your love summons you
affection, and so it was that
she fell deeply in love with to return. . . . Don't give the Countess cause to quarrel with me." Reflect-
an extremely eligible man ing on his experience on the way back, he could not figure out what it
in his middle thirties. And
meant. He had the vague sensation of having been used, but the pleasures
whenever a day passed
without her having set eyes he remembered outweighed his doubts.
upon him, she was restless
for the whole of the
following night. •
However, the gentleman Interpretation. Madame de T is a character in the eighteenth-century
suspected nothing of all libertine short story "No Tomorrow," by Vivant Denon. The young man is
this, and took no notice of the story's narrator. Although fictional, Madame's techniques were clearly
her; and for her part, being
based on those of several well-known libertines of the time, masters of
very cautious, she would
not venture to declare her the game of seduction. And the most dangerous of their weapons was
love by dispatching a insinuation—the means by which Madame cast her spell on the young man,
maidservant or writing him
making him seem the aggressor, giving her the night of pleasure she desired,

[PAGE 243]
Master the Art of Insinuation • 215
and safeguarding her guiltless reputation, all in one stroke. After all, he was a letter, for fear of the
the one who initiated physical contact, or so it seemed. In truth, she was the dangers that this might
entail. But having
one in control, planting precisely the ideas in his mind that she wanted. That
perceived that he was on
first physical encounter in the carriage, for instance, that she had set up by
very friendly terms with a
inviting him closer: she later rebuked him for being forward, but what lin- certain priest, a rotund,
gered in his mind was the excitement of the moment. Her talk of the uncouth, individual who
was nevertheless regarded
countess made him confused and guilty; but then she hinted that his lover
as an outstandingly able
was unfaithful, planting a different seed in his mind: anger, and the desire for friar on account of his very
revenge. Then she asked him to forget what she had said and forgive her saintly way of life, she
calculated that this fellow
for saying it, a key insinuating tactic: "I am asking you to forget what I have
would serve as an ideal go-
said, but I know you cannot; the thought will remain in your mind." Pro- between for her and the
voked this way, it was inevitable he would grab her in the pavilion. She sev- man she loved. And so,
after reflecting on the
eral times mentioned the room in the château—of course he insisted on
strategy she would adopt,
going there. She enveloped the evening in an air of ambiguity. Even her
she paid a visit, at an
words "If you promise to be good" could be read several ways. The young appropriate hour of the
man's head and heart were inflamed with all of the feelings—discontent, day, to the church where he
was to be found, and
confusion, desire—that she had indirectly instilled in him.
having sought him out, she
Particularly in the early phases of a seduction, learn to make everything asked him whether he
you say and do a kind of insinuation. Insinuate doubt with a comment here would agree to confess her.
• Since he could tell at a
and there about other people in the victim's life, making the victim feel
glance that she was a lady
vulnerable. Slight physical contact insinuates desire, as does a fleeting but of quality, the friar gladly
memorable look, or an unusually warm tone of voice, both for the briefest heard her confession, and
when she had got to the
of moments. A passing comment suggests that something about the victim
end of it, she continued as
interests you; but keep it subtle, your words revealing a possibility, creating a follows: • "Father, as I
doubt. You are planting seeds that will take root in the weeks to come. shall explain to you
presently, there is a certain
When you are not there, your targets will fantasize about the ideas you have
matter about which I am
stirred up, and brood upon the doubts. They are slowly being led into your
compelled to seek your
web, unaware that you are in control. How can they resist or become de- advice and assistance.
fensive if they cannot even see what is happening? Having already told you
my name, I feel sure you
will know my family and
What distinguishes a suggestion from other kinds of psy- my husband. He loves me
chical influence, such as a command or the giving of a piece more dearly than life itself,
and since he is enormously
of information or instruction, is that in the case of a sug-
rich, he never has the
gestion an idea is aroused in another person's brain which
slightest difficulty or
is not examined in regard to its origin but is accepted just hesitation in supplying me
as though it had arisen spontaneously in that brain. with every single object for
which I display a yearning.
—SIGMUND FREUD Consequently, my love for
him is quite unbounded,
and if my mere thoughts,
to say nothing of my actual
Keys to Seduction
behavior, were to run
contrary to his wishes and
You cannot pass through life without in one way or another trying to his honor, I would be more
deserving of hellfire than
persuade people of something. Take the direct route, saying exactly
the wickedest woman who
what you want, and your honesty may make you feel good but you are ever lived. • "Now, there is
probably not getting anywhere. People have their own sets of ideas, which a certain person, of
respectable outward
are hardened into stone by habit; your words, entering their minds, com-

[PAGE 244]
216 • The Art of Seduction
appearance, who unless I pete with the thousands of preconceived notions that are already there, and
am mistaken is a close get nowhere. Besides, people resent your attempt to persuade them, as if
acquaintance of yours. I
they were incapable of deciding by themselves—as if you knew better.
really couldn't say what his
name is, but he is tall and Consider instead the power of insinuation and suggestion. It requires some
handsome, his clothes are patience and art, but the results are more than worth it.
brown and elegantly cut,
The way insinuation works is simple: disguised in a banal remark or en-
and, possibly because he is
counter, a hint is dropped. It is about some emotional issue—a possible
unaware of my resolute
nature, he appears to have pleasure not yet attained, a lack of excitement in a person's life. The hint
laid siege to me. He turns registers in the back of the target's mind, a subtle stab at his or her insecuri-
up infallibly whenever I
ties; its source is quickly forgotten. It is too subtle to be memorable at the
either look out of my
window or stand at the time, and later, when it takes root and grows, it seems to have emerged
front door or leave the naturally from the target's own mind, as if it was there all along. Insinuation
house, and I am surprised,
lets you bypass people's natural resistance, for they seem to be listening only
in fact, that he is not here
now. Needless to say, I am to what has originated in themselves. It is a language on its own, communi-
very upset about all this, cating directly with the unconscious. No seducer, no persuader, can hope
because his sort of conduct
to succeed without mastering the language and art of insinuation.
frequently gives an honest
woman a bad name, even A strange man once arrived at the court of Louis XV. No one knew
though she is quite anything about him, and his accent and age were unplaceable. He called
innocent. • " . . . For the himself Count Saint-Germain. He was obviously wealthy; all kinds of gems
love of God, therefore, I
and diamonds glittered on his jacket, his sleeves, his shoes, his fingers. He
implore you to speak to
him severely and persuade could play the violin to perfection, paint magnificently. But the most in-
him to refrain from his toxicating thing about him was his conversation.
importunities. There are
In truth, the count was the greatest charlatan of the eighteenth
plenty of other women who
doubtless find this sort of century—a man who had mastered the art of insinuation. As he spoke, a
thing amusing, and who word here and there would slip out—a vague allusion to the philosopher's
will enjoy being ogled and
stone, which turned base metal into gold, or to the elixir of life. He did not
spied upon by him, but I
personally have no say he possessed these things, but he made you associate him with their
inclination for it powers. Had he simply claimed to have them, no one would have believed
whatsoever, and I find his him and people would have turned away. The count might refer to a man
behavior exceedingly
who had died forty years earlier as if he had known him personally; had
disagreeable." • And
having reached the end of this been so, the count would have had to be in his eighties, although he
her speech, the lady bowed looked to be in his forties. He mentioned the elixir of life. ... he seems so
her head as though she
young. . . .
were going to burst into
tears. • The reverend friar The key to the count's words was vagueness. He always dropped his
realized immediately who hints into a lively conversation, grace notes in an ongoing melody. Only
it was to whom she was
later would people reflect on what he had said. After a while, people started
referring, and having
warmly commended her to come to him, inquiring about the philosopher's stone and the elixir of
purity of mind . . . he life, not realizing that it was he who had planted these ideas in their minds.
promised to take all
Remember: to sow a seductive idea you must engage people's imaginations,
necessary steps to ensure
their fantasies, their deepest yearnings. What sets the wheels spinning is
that the fellow ceased to
annoy her. . . . • Shortly suggesting things that people already want to hear—the possibility of plea-
afterward, the gentleman in sure, wealth, health, adventure. In the end, these good things turn out to be
question paid one of his
precisely what you seem to offer them. They will come to you as if on
regular visits to the
reverend friar, and after their own, unaware that you insinuated the idea in their heads.
they had conversed together In 1807, Napoleon Bonaparte decided it was critical for him to win
for a while on general
the Russian Czar Alexander I to his side. He wanted two things out of the

[PAGE 245]
Master the Art of Insinuation • 217
czar: a peace treaty in which they agreed to carve up Europe and the Mid- topics, the friar drew him to
dle East; and a marriage alliance, in which he would divorce his wife one side and reproached
him in a very kindly sort of
Josephine and marry into the czar's family. Instead of proposing these
way for the amorous
things directly, Napoleon decided to seduce the czar. Using polite social
glances which, as the lady
encounters and friendly conversations as his battlefields, he went to work. had given him to
An apparent slip of the tongue revealed that Josephine could not bear chil- understand, he believed
him to be casting in her
dren; Napoleon quickly changed the subject. A comment here and there
direction. • Not
seemed to suggest a linking of the destinies of France and Russia. Just be- unnaturally, the gentleman
fore they were to part one evening, he talked of his desire for children, was amazed, for he had
never so much as looked at
sighed sadly, then excused himself for bed, leaving the czar to sleep on
the lady and it was very
this. He escorted the czar to a play on the themes of glory, honor, and seldom that he passed by
empire; now, in later conversations, he could disguise his insinuations un- her house. . . . • The
gentleman, being rather
der the cover of discussing the play. Within a few weeks, the czar was
more perceptive than the
speaking to his ministers of a marriage alliance and a treaty with France as
reverend friar, was not
if they were his own ideas. exactly slow to appreciate
the lady's cleverness, and
Slips of the tongue, apparently inadvertent "sleep on it" comments, al-
putting on a somewhat
luring references, statements for which you quickly apologize—all of these
sheepish expression, he
have immense insinuating power. They get under people's skin like a poi- promised not to bother her
son, and take on a life of their own. The key to succeeding with your in- any more. But after leaving
the friar, he made his way
sinuations is to make them when your targets are at their most relaxed or
toward the house of the
distracted, so that they are not aware of what is happening. Polite banter is lady, who was keeping
often the perfect front for this; people are thinking about what they will say continuous vigil at a tiny
little window so that she
next, or are absorbed in their own thoughts. Your insinuations will barely
would see him if he
register, which is how you want it. happened to pass by. . . .
In one of his early campaigns, John F. Kennedy addressed a group of And from that day
forward, proceeding with
veterans. Kennedy's brave exploits during World War II—the PT-109 inci-
the maximum prudence
dent had made him a war hero—were known to all; but in the speech, he and conveying the
talked of the other men on the boat, never mentioning himself. He knew, impression that he was
engaged in some other
however, that what he had done was on everyone's mind, because in fact he
business entirely, he became
had put it there. Not only did his silence on the subject make them think of
a regular visitor to the
it on their own, it made Kennedy seem humble and modest, qualities that neighborhood.
go well with heroism. In seduction, as the French courtesan Ninon de
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO, THE
l'Enclos advised, it is better not to talk about your love for a person. Let DECAMERON, TRANSLATED BY
your target read it in your manner. Your silence on the subject will have G. H. MCWILLIAM
more insinuating power than if you had addressed it directly.
Not only words insinuate; pay attention to gestures and looks. Madame
Glances are the heavy
Récamier's favorite technique was to keep her words banal and the look in
artillery of the flirt:
her eyes enticing. The flow of conversation would keep men from thinking everything can be conveyed
too deeply about these occasional looks, but they would be haunted by in a look, yet that look can
always be denied, for it
them. Lord Byron had his famous "underlook": while everyone was dis-
cannot be quoted word for
cussing some uninteresting subject, he would seem to hang his head, but
word.
then a young woman (the target) would see him glancing upward at her, his
—STENDHAL, QUOTED IN
head still tilted. It was a look that seemed dangerous, challenging, but also
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES,
ambiguous; many women were hooked by it. The face speaks its own lan- ED., VICE: AN ANTHOLOGY
guage. We are used to trying to read people's faces, which are often better
indicators of their feelings than what they say, which is so easy to control.

[PAGE 246]
218 • The Art of Seduction
Since people are always reading your looks, use them to transmit the insinu-
ating signals you choose.
Finally, the reason insinuation works so well is not just that it bypasses
people's natural resistance. It is also the language of pleasure. There is too
little mystery in the world; too many people say exactly what they feel or
want. We yearn for something enigmatic, for something to feed our fan-
tasies. Because of the lack of suggestion and ambiguity in daily life, the
person who uses them suddenly seems to have something alluring and full
of promise. It is a kind of titillating game—what is this person up to? What
does he or she mean? Hints, suggestions, and insinuations create a seductive
atmosphere, signaling that their victim is no longer involved in the routines
of daily life but has entered another realm.
Symbol: The Seed.
The soil is carefully prepared. The seeds are planted
months in advance. Once they are in the ground, no one
knows what hand threw them there. They are part of the
earth. Disguise your manipulations by planting seeds
that take root on their own.
Reversal
The danger in insinuation is that when you leave things ambiguous your
target may misread them. There are moments, particularly later on in a
seduction, when it is best to communicate your idea directly, particularly
once you know the target will welcome it, Casanova often played things
that way. When he could sense that a woman desired him, and needed little
preparation, he would use a direct, sincere, gushing comment to go straight
to her head like a drug and make her fall under his spell. When the rake
and writer Gabriele D'Annunzio met a woman he desired, he rarely de-
layed. Flattery flowed from his mouth and pen. He would charm with his
"sincerity" (sincerity can be feigned, and is just one stratagem among oth-
ers). This only works, however, when you sense that the target is easily
yours. If not, the defenses and suspicions you raise by direct attack will
make your seduction impossible. When in doubt, indirection is the better
route.

[PAGE 247]
Enter Their Spirit
Most
people are locked in their
own worlds, making them stubborn
and hard to persuade. The way to lure
them out of their shell and set up your seduction is
to enter their spirit. Play by their rules, enjoy what they
enjoy, adapt yourself to their moods. In doing so you will
stroke their deep-rooted narcissism and lower their defenses.
Hypnotized by the mirror image you present, they will open up,
becoming vulnerable to your subtle influence. Soon you can
shift the dynamic: once you have entered their spirit you
can make them enter yours, at a point when it is
too late to turn back. Indulge your targets'
every mood and whim, giving them
nothing to react against or
resist.

[PAGE 248]


[PAGE 249]
The Indulgent Strategy
In October of 1961, the American journalist Cindy Adams was granted
an exclusive interview with President Sukarno of Indonesia. It was a re-
markable coup, for Adams was a little-known journalist at the time, while
Sukarno was a world figure in the midst of a crisis. A leader of the fight for
Indonesia's independence, he had been the country's president since 1949,
when the Dutch finally gave up the colony. By the early 1960s, his daring
foreign policy had made him hated in the United States, some calling him You're anxious to keep
your mistress? \ Convince
the Hitler of Asia.
her she's knocked you all of
Adams decided that in the interests of a lively interview, she would not a heap \ With her stunning
be cowed or overawed by Sukarno, and she began the conversation by jok- looks. If it's purple she's
wearing, praise purple; \
ing with him. To her pleasant surprise, her ice-breaking tactic seemed to
When she's in a silk dress,
work: Sukarno warmed up to her. He let the interview run well over an say silk \ Suits her best of
hour, and when it was over he loaded her with gifts. Her success was re- all. . . Admire \ Her
singing voice, her gestures
markable enough, but even more so were the friendly letters she began
as she dances, \ Cry
to receive from Sukarno after she and her husband had returned to New
"Encore!" when she stops.
York. A few years later, he proposed that she collaborate with him on his You can even praise \ Her
autobiography. performance in bed, her
talent for love-making— \
Adams, who was used to doing puff pieces on third-rate celebrities, was
Spell out what turned you
confused. She knew Sukarno had a reputation as a devilish Don Juan—le on. \ Though she may
grand seducteur, the French called him. He had had four wives and hundreds show fiercer in action than
any Medusa, \ Her lover
of conquests. He was handsome, and obviously he was attracted to her, but
will always describe her as
why choose her for this prestigious task? Perhaps his libido was too power- kind \ And gentle. But
ful for him to care about such things. Nevertheless, it was an offer she couldtake care not to give
yourself away while \
not refuse.
Making such tongue-in-
In January of 1964, Adams returned to Indonesia. Her strategy, she had cheek compliments, don't
decided, would stay the same: she would be the brassy, straight-talking lady allow \ Your expression to
ruin the message. Art's
who had seemed to charm Sukarno three years earlier. During her first in-
most effective \ When
terview with him for the book, she complained in rather strong terms
concealed. Detection
about the rooms she had been given as lodgings. As if he were her secre- discredits you for good.
tary, she dictated a letter to him, which he was to sign, detailing the special
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
treatment she was to be given by one and all. To her amazement, he duti- TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
fully copied out the letter, and signed it.
Next on Adams's schedule was a tour of Indonesia to interview people
who had known Sukarno in his youth. So she complained to him about the The little boy (or girl) seeks
to fascinate his or her
plane she had to fly on, which she said was unsafe. "I tell you what, honey,"
parents. In Oriental
she told him, "I think you should give me my own plane." "Okay," he an- literature, imitation is
221

[PAGE 250]
222 • The Art of Seduction
reckoned to be one of the swered, apparently somewhat abashed. One, however, was not enough, she
ways of attracting. The went on; she required several planes, and a helicopter, and her own per-
Sanskrit texts, for
sonal pilot, a good one. He agreed to everything. The leader of Indonesia
example, give an important
part to the trick of the seemed to be not just intimidated by Adams but totally under her spell. He
woman copying the dress, praised her intelligence and wit. At one point he confided, "Do you know
expressions, and speech of
why I'm doing this biography? . . . Only because of you, that's why." He
her beloved. This kind of
paid attention to her clothes, complimenting her outfits, noticing any
mimetic drama is urged on
the woman who, "being change in them. He was more like a fawning suitor than the "Hitler of
unable to unite with her Asia."
beloved, imitates him to
Inevitably, of course, he made passes at her. She was an attractive
distract his thoughts." •
The child too, using the woman. First there was the hand on top of her hand, then a stolen kiss. She
devices of imitating spurned him every time, making it clear she was happily married, but she
attitudes, dress, and so on,
was worried: if all he had wanted was an affair, the whole book deal could
seeks to fascinate, until a
magical intention, the fall apart. Once again, though, her straightforward strategy seemed the
father or mother and thus right one. Surprisingly, he backed down without anger or resentment. He
to "distract its thoughts."
promised that his affection for her would remain platonic. She had to admit
Identification means that
one is abandoning and not that he was not at all what she had expected, or what had been described to
abandoning amorous her. Perhaps he liked being dominated by a woman.
desires. It is a lure which The interviews continued for several months, and she noticed slight
the child uses to capture his
changes in him. She still addressed him familiarly, spicing the conversation
parents and which, it must
be admitted, they fall for. with brazen comments, but now he returned them, delighting in this kind
The same is true for the of saucy banter. He assumed the same lively mood that she strategically
masses, who imitate their
forced on herself. At first he had dressed in military uniform, or in his Ital-
leader, bear his name and
repeat his gestures. They ian suits. Now he dressed casually, even going barefoot, conforming to the
bow to him, but at the casual style of their relationship. One night he remarked that he liked the
same time they are
color of her hair. It was Clairol, blue-black, she explained. He wanted to
unconsciously baiting a trap
to hold him. Great have the same color; she had to bring him a bottle. She did as he asked,
ceremonies and imagining he was joking, but a few days later he requested her presence at
demonstrations are just as
the palace to dye his hair for him. She did so, and now they had the exact
much occasions when the
same hair color.
multitudes charm the
leader as vice versa. The book, Sukarno: An Autobiography as Told to Cindy Adams, was pub-
lished in 1965. To American readers' surprise, Sukarno came across as re-
—SERGE MOSCOVICI, THE AGE
OF THE CROWD, TRANSLATED BY markably charming and lovable, which was indeed how Adams described
J. C.WHITEHOUSE
him to one and all. If anyone argued, she would say that they did not know
him the way she did. Sukarno was well pleased, and had the book distrib-
uted far and wide. It helped gain sympathy for him in Indonesia, where he
My sixth brother, he who was now being threatened with a military coup. And Sukarno was not
had both his lips cut off,
surprised—he had known all along that Adams would do a far better job
Prince of the Faithful, is
with his memoirs than any "serious" journalist.
called Shakashik. • In his
youth he was very poor.
One day, as he was
begging in the streets of
Interpretation. Who was seducing whom? It was Sukarno who was doing
Baghdad, he passed by a
splendid mansion, at the the seducing, and his seduction of Adams followed a classical sequence.
gates of which stood an First, he chose the right victim. An experienced journalist would have re-
impressive array of
sisted the lure of a personal relationship with the subject, and a man would
attendants. Upon inquiry
my brother was informed have been less susceptible to his charm. And so he picked a woman, and

[PAGE 251]
Enter Their Spirit • 223
one whose journalistic experience lay elsewhere. At his first meeting with that the house belonged to
Adams, he sent mixed signals: he was friendly to her, but hinted at another a member of the wealthy
and powerful Barmecide
kind of interest as well. Then, having insinuated a doubt in her mind (Per-
family. Shakashik
haps he just wants an affair?), he proceeded to mirror her. He indulged her approached the door-
every mood, retreating every time she complained. Indulging a person is a keepers and solicited alms.
form of entering their spirit, letting them dominate for the time being. • "Go in," they said,
"and our master will give
Perhaps Sukarno's passes at Adams showed his uncontrollable libido at
you all that you desire." •
work, or perhaps they were more cunning. He had a reputation as a Don My brother entered the
Juan; failing to make a pass at her would have hurt her feelings. (Women lofty vestibule and
proceeded to a spacious,
are often less offended at being found attractive than one imagines, and
marble-paved hall, hung
Sukarno was clever enough to have given each of his four wives the im- with tapestry and
pression that she was his favorite.) The pass out of the way, he moved fur- overlooking a beautiful
garden. He stood
ther into her spirit, taking on her casual air, even slightly feminizing himself
bewildered for a moment,
by adopting her hair color. The result was that she decided he was not what not knowing where to turn
she had expected or feared him to be. He was not in the least threatening, his steps, and then
advanced to the far end of
and after all, she was the one in control. What Adams failed to realize was
the hall. There, among the
that once her defenses were lowered, she was oblivious to how deeply he
cushions, reclined a
had engaged her emotions. She had not charmed him, he had charmed her. handsome old man with a
What he wanted all along was what he got: a personal memoir written by a long beard, whom my
brother recognized at once
sympathetic foreigner, who gave the world a rather engaging portrait of a
as the master of the house.
man of whom many were suspicious. • "What can I do for you,
Of all the seductive tactics, entering someone's spirit is perhaps the my friend?" asked the old
man, as he rose to welcome
most devilish of all. It gives your victims the feeling that they are seducing
my brother. • When
you. The fact that you are indulging them, imitating them, entering their Shakashik replied that he
spirit, suggests that you are under their spell. You are not a dangerous se- was a hungry beggar,
the old man expressed the
ducer to be wary of, but someone compliant and unthreatening. The atten-
deepest compassion and
tion you pay to them is intoxicating—since you are mirroring them, rent his fine robes, crying:
everything they see and hear from you reflects their own ego and tastes. "Is it possible that there
should be a man as hungry
What a boost to their vanity. All this sets up the seduction, the series of ma-
as yourself in a city where
neuvers that will turn the dynamic around. Once their defenses are down,
I am living? It is, indeed, a
they are open to your subtle influence. Soon you will begin to take over the disgrace that I cannot
dance, and without even noticing the shift, they will find themselves enter- endure!" Then he
comforted my brother,
ing your spirit. This is the endgame.
adding: "I insist that you
stay with me and partake
Women are not at their ease except with those who take of my dinner." • With this
chances with them, and enter into their spirit. the master of the house
clapped his hands and
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS called out to one of the
slaves: "Bring in the basin
and ewer." Then he said to
my brother: "Come
Keys to Seduction
forward, my friend, and
wash your hands." •
One of the great sources of frustration in our lives is other people's Shakashik rose to do so,
but saw neither ewer nor
stubbornness. How hard it is to reach them, to make them see things
basin. He was bewildered
our way. We often have the impression that when they seem to be listening to see his host make
to us, and apparently agreeing with us, it is all superficial—the moment we gestures as though he were
pouring water on his hands
are gone, they revert to their own ideas. We spend our lives butting up

[PAGE 252]
224 • The Art of Seduction
from an invisible vessel and against people, as if they were stone walls. But instead of complaining
then drying them with an about how misunderstood or ignored you are, why not try something dif-
invisible towel. When he
ferent: instead of seeing other people as spiteful or indifferent, instead of
finished, the host called out
to his attendants: "Bring trying to figure out why they act the way they do, look at them through
in the table!" • Numerous the eyes of the seducer. The way to lure people out of their natural in-
servants hurried in and out
tractability and self-obsession is to enter their spirit.
of the hall, as though they
All of us are narcissists. When we were children our narcissism was
were preparing for a meal.
My brother could still see physical: we were interested in our own image, our own body, as if it were
nothing. Yet his host a separate being. As we grow older, our narcissism grows more psychologi-
invited him to sit at the
cal: we become absorbed in our own tastes, opinions, experiences. A hard
imaginary table, saying,
"Honor me by eating of shell forms around us. Paradoxically, the way to entice people out of this
this meat." • The old man shell is to become more like them, in fact a kind of mirror image of them.
moved his hands about as
You do not have to spend days studying their minds; simply conform to
though he were touching
invisible dishes, and also their moods, adapt to their tastes, play along with whatever they send your
moved his jaws and lips as way. In doing so you will lower their natural defensiveness. Their sense of
though he were chewing.
self-esteem does not feel threatened by your strangeness or different habits.
Then said he to
People truly love themselves, but what they love most of all is to see their
Shakashik: "Eat your fill,
my friend, for you must be ideas and tastes reflected in another person. This validates them. Their ha-
famished." • My brother bitual insecurity vanishes. Hypnotized by their mirror image, they relax.
began to move his jaws, to
Now that their inner wall has crumbled, you can slowly draw them out,
chew and swallow, as
though he were eating, and eventually turn the dynamic around. Once they are open to you, it be-
while the old man still comes easy to infect them with your own moods and heat. Entering the
coaxed him, saying: "Eat,
other person's spirit is a kind of hypnosis; it is the most insidious and effec-
my friend, and note the
excellence of this bread and tive form of persuasion known to man.
its whiteness. " • "This In the eighteenth-century Chinese novel The Dream of the Red Cham-
man," thought Shakashik,
ber, all the young girls in the prosperous house of Chia are in love with the
"must be fond of practical
jokes. " So he said, "It is, rakish Pao Yu. He is certainly handsome, but what makes him irresistible is
sir, the whitest bread I have his uncanny ability to enter a young girl's spirit. Pao Yu has spent his youth
ever seen, and I have never around girls, whose company he has always preferred. As a result, he never
tasted the like in all my
comes over as threatening and aggressive. He is granted entry to girls'
life. " • "This bread," said
the host, "was baked by a rooms, they see him everywhere, and the more they see him the more they
slave girl whom I bought fall under his spell. It is not that Pao Yu is feminine; he remains a man, but
for five hundred dinars."
one who can be more or less masculine as the situation requires. His famil-
Then he called out to one
of his slaves: "Bring in the iarity with young girls allows him the flexibility to enter their spirit.
meat pudding, and let there This is a great advantage. The difference between the sexes is what
be plenty of fat in it!"
makes love and seduction possible, but it also involves an element of fear
• ... Thereupon the host
moved his fingers as though and distrust. A woman may fear male aggression and violence; a man is
to pick up a morsel from an often unable to enter a woman's spirit, and so he remains strange and
imaginary dish, and
threatening. The greatest seducers in history, from Casanova to John F.
popped the invisible
Kennedy, grew up surrounded by women and had a touch of femininity
delicacy into my brother's
mouth. • The old man themselves. The philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, in his novel The Seducer's
continued to enlarge upon Diary, recommends spending more time with the opposite sex, getting to
the excellences of the
know the "enemy" and its weaknesses, so that you can turn this knowledge
various dishes, while my
brother became so to your advantage.
ravenously hungry that he Ninon de l'Enclos, one of the greatest seductresses who ever lived, had
would have willingly died
definite masculine qualities. She could impress a man with her intense

[PAGE 253]
Enter Their Spirit • 225
philosophical keenness, and charm him by seeming to share his interest in for a crust of barley bread.
politics and warfare. Many men first formed deep friendships with her, • "Have you ever tasted
anything more delicious,"
only to later fall madly in love. The masculine in a woman is as soothing to
went on the old man,
men as the feminine in a man is to women. To a man, a woman's strange-
"than the spices in these
ness can create frustration and even hostility. He may be lured into a sexual dishes?" • "Never,
encounter, but a longer-lasting spell cannot be created without an accom- indeed," replied
Shakashik. • "Eat
panying mental seduction. The key is to enter his spirit. Men are often
heartily, then," said his
seduced by the masculine element in a woman's behavior or character. host, "and do not be
In the novel Clarissa (1748) by Samuel Richardson, the young and de- ashamed!" • "I thank
you, sir," answered
vout Clarissa Harlowe is being courted by the notorious rake Lovelace.
Shakashik, "but I have
Clarissa knows Lovelace's reputation, but for the most part he has not acted already eaten my fill. " •
as she would expect: he is polite, seems a little sad and confused. At one Presently, however, the old
man clapped his hands
point she finds out that he has done a most noble and charitable deed to a
again and cried: "Bring in
family in distress, giving the father money, helping the man's daughter get the wine!" • . . . "Sir,"
married, giving them wholesome advice. At last Lovelace confesses to said Shakashik, "your
Clarissa what she has suspected: he wants to repent, to change his ways. His generosity overwhelms
me!" He lifted the invisible
letters to her are emotional, almost religious in their passion. Perhaps she
cup to his lips, and made
will be the one to lead him to righteousness? But of course Lovelace has as if to drain it at one gulp.
trapped her: he is using the seducer's tactic of mirroring her tastes, in this • "Health and joy to
you!" exclaimed the old
case her spirituality. Once she lets her guard down, once she believes she
man, as he pretended to
can reform him, she is doomed: now he can slowly insinuate his own spirit pour himself some wine
into his letters and encounters with her. Remember: the operative word is and drink it off. He
handed another cup to his
"spirit," and that is often exactly where to take aim. By seeming to mirror
guest, and they both
someone's spiritual values you can seem to establish a deep-rooted harmony continued to act in this
between the two of you, which can then be transferred to the physical fashion until Shakashik,
feigning himself drunk,
plane.
began to roll his head from
When Josephine Baker moved to Paris, in 1925, as part of an all-black side to side. Then, taking
revue, her exoticism made her an overnight sensation. But the French are his bounteous host
notoriously fickle, and Baker sensed that their interest in her would quickly unawares, he suddenly
raised his arm so high that
pass to someone else. To seduce them for good, she entered their spirit. She
the white of his armpit
learned French and began to sing in it. She started dressing and acting as a could be seen, and dealt
stylish French lady, as if to say that she preferred the French way of life to him a blow on the neck
which made the hall echo
the American. Countries are like people: they have vast insecurities, and
with the sound. And this
they feel threatened by other customs. It is often quite seductive to a people he followed by a second
to see an outsider adopting their ways. Benjamin Disraeli was born and blow. • The old man rose
in anger and cried: "What
lived all his life in England, but he was Jewish by birth, and had exotic fea-
are you doing, vile
tures; the provincial English considered him an outsider. Yet he was more creature?" • "Sir" replied
English in his manners and tastes than many an Englishman, and this was my brother, "you have
received your humble slave
part of his charm, which he proved by becoming the leader of the Conser-
into your house and loaded
vative Party. Should you be an outsider (as most of us ultimately are), turn
him with your generosity;
it to advantage: play on your alien nature in such a way as to show the you have fed him with the
group how deeply you prefer their tastes and customs to your own. choicest food and quenched
his thirst with the most
In 1752, the notorious rake Saltykov determined to be the first man in
potent wines. Alas, he
the Russian court to seduce the twenty-three-year-old grand duchess, the became drunk, and forgot
future Empress Catherine the Great. He knew that she was lonely; her hus- his manners! But you are
so noble, sir, that you will
band Peter ignored her, as did many of the other courtiers. And yet the ob-

[PAGE 254]
226 • The Art of Seduction
surely pardon his offence. " stacles were immense: she was spied on day and night. Still, Saltykov man-
• When he heard these aged to befriend the young woman, and to enter her all-too-small circle.
words, the old man burst
He finally got her alone, and made it clear to her how well he understood
out laughing and said:
"For a long time I have her loneliness, how deeply he disliked her husband, and how much he
jested with all types of shared her interest in the new ideas that were sweeping Europe. Soon he
men, but no one has ever
found himself able to arrange further meetings, where he gave her the im-
had the patience or the wit
pression that when he was with her, nothing else in the world mattered.
to enter into my humors as
you have done. Now, Catherine fell deeply in love with him, and he did in fact become her first
therefore, I pardon you, lover. Saltykov had entered her spirit.
and ask you in truth to cat
When you mirror people, you focus intense attention on them. They
and drink with me, and to
he my companion as long will sense the effort you are making, and will find it flattering. Obviously
as I live. " • Then the old you have chosen them, separating them out from the rest. There seems to
man ordered his attendants
be nothing else in your life but them—their moods, their tastes, their spirit.
to serve all the dishes
which they had consumed The more you focus on them, the deeper the spell you produce, and the in-
in fancy, and when he and toxicating effect you have on their vanity.
my brother had eaten their
Many of us have difficulty reconciling the person we are right now
fill they repaired to the
with the person we want to be. We are disappointed that we have compro-
drinking chamber, where
beautiful young women mised our youthful ideals, and we still imagine ourselves as that person
sang and made music. The who had so much promise, but whom circumstances prevented from real-
old Barmecide gave
izing it. When you are mirroring someone, do not stop at the person they
Shakashik a robe of honor
and made him his constant have become; enter the spirit of that ideal person they wanted to be. This
companion. is how the French writer Chateaubriand managed to become a great se-
—"THE TALE OF SHAKASHIK, ducer, despite his physical ugliness. When he was growing up, in the latter
THE BARBER'S SIXTH BROTHER," eighteenth century, romanticism was coming into fashion, and many
TALES FROM THE THOUSAND
young women felt deeply oppressed by the lack of romance in their lives.
AND ONE NIGHTS, TRANSLATED
BY N.J. DAWOOD Chateaubriand would reawaken the fantasy they had had as young girls of
being swept off their feet, of fulfilling romantic ideals. This form of enter-
ing another's spirit is perhaps the most effective kind, because it makes peo-
ple feel better about themselves. In your presence, they live the life of the
person they had wanted to be—a great lover, a romantic hero, whatever it
is. Discover those crushed ideals and mirror them, bringing them back to
life by reflecting them back to your target. Few can resist such a lure.
Symbol: The
Hunter's Mirror. The lark is a sa-
vory bird, but difficult to catch. In the field, the
hunter places a mirror on a stand. The lark lands in
front of the glass, steps back and forth, entranced by its own
moving image and by the imitative mating dance it sees per-
formed before its eyes. Hypnotized, the bird loses all sense of its
surroundings, until the hunter's net traps it against the mirror.

[PAGE 255]
Enter Their Spirit • 227
Reversal
This desire for a double of
the other sex that resembles
In 1897 in Berlin, the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, whose reputation would us absolutely while still
being other, for a magical
later circle the world, met Lou Andreas-Salomé, the Russian-born writer
creature who is ourself
and beauty who was notorious for having broken Nietzsche's heart. She while possessing the
was the darling of Berlin intellectuals, and although Rilke was twenty-two advantage, over all our
imaginings, of an
and she was thirty-six, he fell head over heels in love with her. He flooded
autonomous existence. . . .
her with love letters, which showed that he had read all her books and We find traces of it in even
knew her tastes intimately. The two became friends. Soon she was editing the most banal
circumstances of love: in
his poetry, and he hung on her every word.
the attraction linked to any
Salomé was flattered by Rilke's mirroring of her spirit, enchanted by change, any disguise, as in
the intense attention he paid her and the spiritual communion they began the importance of unison
and the repetition of self in
to develop. She became his lover. But she was worried about his future; it
the other. . . . The great,
was difficult to make a living as a poet, and she encouraged him to learn the implacable amorous
her native language, Russian, and become a translator. He followed her ad- passions are all linked to
the fact that a being
vice so avidly that within months he could speak Russian. They visited
imagines he sees his most
Russia together, and Rilke was overwhelmed by what he saw—the peas-
secret self spying upon him
ants, the folk customs, the art, the architecture. Back in Berlin, he turned behind the curtain of
his rooms into a kind of shrine to Russia, and started wearing Russian peas- another's eyes.
ant blouses and peppering his conversation with Russian phrases. Now the —ROBERT MUSIL, QUOTED IN
charm of his mirroring soon wore off. At first Salomé had been flattered DENIS DE ROUGEMONT, LOVE
DECLARED, TRANSLATED BY
that he shared her interests so intensely, but now she saw this as something RICHARD HOWARD
else: he seemed to have no real identity. He had become dependent on her
for his own self-esteem. It was all so slavish. In 1899, much to his horror,
she broke off the relationship.
The lesson is simple: your entry into a person's spirit must be a tactic, a
way to bring him or her under your spell. You cannot be simply a sponge,
soaking up the other person's moods. Mirror them for too long and they
will see through you and be repelled by you. Beneath the similarity to them
that you make them see, you must have a strong underlying sense of your
own identity. When the time comes, you will want to lead them into your
spirit; you cannot live on their turf. Never take mirroring too far, then. It is
only useful in the first phase of a seduction; at some point the dynamic
must be reversed.

[PAGE 256]


[PAGE 257]
Create Temptation
Lure the target deep into your seduction by creating the
proper temptation: a glimpse of the pleasures to come. As
the serpent tempted Eve with the promise of forbidden
knowledge, you must awaken a desire in your tar-
gets that they cannot control. Find that weakness
of theirs, that fantasy that has yet to be real-
ized, and hint that you can lead them toward
it. It could be wealth, it could be adventure, it
could be forbidden and guilty pleasures; the
key is to keep it vague. Dangle the prize before
their eyes, postponing satisfaction, and let their
minds do the rest. The future seems ripe with possi-
bility. Stimulate a curiosity stronger than the doubts
and anxieties that go with it, and they will follow you.

[PAGE 258]


[PAGE 259]
The Tantalizing Object
Some time in the 1880s, a gentleman named Don Juan de Todellas was
wandering through a park in Madrid when he saw a woman in her early
twenties getting out of a coach, followed by a two-year-old child and a
nursemaid. The young woman was elegantly dressed, but what took Don
Juan's breath away was her resemblance to a woman he had known nearly
three years before. Surely she could not be the same person. The woman he
had known, Cristeta Moreruela, was a showgirl in a second-rate theater. For these two crimes
Tantalus was punished
She had been an orphan and was quite poor—her circumstances could not
with the ruin of his
have changed that much. He moved closer: the same beautiful face. And kingdom and, after his
then he heard her voice. He was so shocked that he had to sit down: it was death by Zeus's own hand,
with eternal torment in the
indeed the same woman.
company of Ixion,
Don Juan was an incorrigible seducer, whose conquests were innu-
Sisyphus, Tityus, the
merable and of every variety. But he remembered his affair with Cristeta Danaids, and others. Now
quite clearly, because she had been so young—the most charming girl he he hangs, perennially
consumed by thirst and
had ever met. He had seen her in the theater, had courted her assiduously,
hunger, from the bough of
and had managed to persuade her to take a trip with him to a seaside town. a fruit tree which leans over
Although they had separate rooms, nothing could stop Don Juan: he made a marshy lake. Its waves
lap against his waist, and
up a story about business troubles, gained her sympathy, and in a tender
sometimes reach his chin,
moment took advantage of her weakness. A few days later he left her, on yet whenever he bends
the pretext that he had to attend to business. He believed he would never down to drink, they slip
away, and nothing remains
see her again. Feeling a little guilty—a rare occurrence with him—he sent
but the black mud at his
her 5,000 pesetas, pretending he would eventually rejoin her. Instead he feet; or, if he ever succeeds
went to Paris. He had only recently returned to Madrid. in scooping up a handful of
water, it slips through his
As he sat and remembered all this, an idea troubled him: the child.
fingers before he can do
Could the boy possibly be his? If not, she must have married almost imme-
more than wet his cracked
diately after their affair. How could she do such a thing? She was obviously lips, leaving him thirstier
wealthy now. Who could her husband be? Did he know her past? Mixed than ever. The tree is laden
with pears, shining apples,
with his confusion was intense desire. She was so young and beautiful. Why
sweet figs, ripe olives and
had he given her up so easily? Somehow, even if she was married, he had topomegranates, which
get her back. dangle against his
shoulders; but whenever he
Don Juan began to frequent the park every day. He saw her a few more
reaches for the luscious
times; their eyes met, but she pretended not to notice him. Tracing the fruit, a gust of wind whirls
nursemaid during one of her errands, he struck up a conversation with her, them out of his reach.
and asked her about her mistress's husband. She told him the man's name —ROBERT GRAVES, THE GREEK
was Señor Martínez, and that he was away on an extended business trip; she MYTHS, VOLUME 2
also told him where Cristeta now lived. Don Juan gave her a note to give to
231

[PAGE 260]
232 • The Art of Seduction
Don Juan: Arminta, listen her mistress. Then he strolled by Cristeta's house—a beautiful palace. His
to the truth—-for are not worst suspicions were confirmed: she had married for money.
women friends of truth? I
Cristeta refused to see him. He persisted, sending more notes. Finally,
am a nobleman, heir to the
ancient family of the to avoid a scene, she agreed to meet him, just once, in the park. He pre-
Tenorios, the conquerors of pared for the meeting carefully: seducing her again would be a delicate op-
Seville. After the king, my
eration. But when he saw her coming toward him, in her beautiful clothes,
father is the most powerful
his emotions, and his lust, got the better of him. She could only belong to
and considered man at
court. . . . By chance I him, never to another man, he told her. Cristeta took offense at this; obvi-
happened on this road and ously her present circumstances prevented even one more meeting. Still,
saw you. Love sometimes
beneath her coolness he could sense strong emotions. He begged to see her
behaves in a manner that
surprises even himself. . . . again, but she left without promising anything. He sent her more letters,
• Arminta: I don't know if meanwhile wracking his brains trying to piece it all together: Who was this
what you're saying is truth
Señor Martínez? Why would he marry a showgirl? How could Cristeta be
or lying rhetoric. I am
married to Batricio, wrested away from him?
everybody knows it. How Finally Cristeta agreed to meet Don Juan one more time, in the theater,
can the marriage be
where he dared not risk a scandal. They took a box, where they could talk.
annulled, even if he
She reassured him the child was not his. She said he only wanted her now
abandons me? • Don Juan:
When the marriage is not because she belonged to another, because he could not have her. No, he
consummated, whether by said, he had changed; he would do anything to get her back. Disconcert-
malice or deceit, it can be
ingly, at moments her eyes seemed to be flirting with him. But then she
annulled. . . . • Arminta:
You are right. But, God seemed to be about to cry, and rested her head on his shoulder—only to
help me, won't you desert get up immediately, as if realizing this was a mistake. This was their last
me the moment you have
meeting, she said, and quickly fled. Don Juan was beside himself. She was
separated me from my
husband? . . . • Don playing with him; she was a coquette. He had only been claiming to have
Juan: Arminta, light of my changed, but perhaps it was true: no woman had ever treated him this way
eyes, tomorrow your
before. He would never have allowed it.
beautiful feet will slip into
polished silver slippers with For the next few nights Don Juan slept poorly. All he could think about
buttons of the purest gold. was Cristeta. He had nightmares about killing her husband, about growing
And your alabaster throat
old and being alone. It was all too much. He had to leave town. He sent
will be imprisoned in
her a goodbye note, and to his amazement, she replied: she wanted to see
beautiful necklaces; on
your fingers, rings set with him, she had something to tell him. By now he was too weak to resist. As
amethysts will shine like she had requested, he met her on a bridge, at night. This time she made no
stars, and from your ears
effort to control herself: yes, she still loved Don Juan, and was ready to run
will da ngle orien tal pearls.
• Arminta: I am yours. away with him. But he should come to her house tomorrow, in broad day-
light, and take her away. There could be no secrecy.
—TIRSO DE MOLINA,
THE PLAYBOY OF SEVILLE, Beside himself with joy, Don Juan agreed to her demands. The next day
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M. he showed up at her palace at the appointed hour, and asked for Señora
SCHIZZANO AND OSCAR
Martinez. There was no one there by that name, said the woman at the
MANDLL, IN MANDEL, ED.,
THE THEATRE OF DON JUAN door. Don Juan insisted: her name is Cristeta. Ah, Cristeta, the woman said:
she lives in the back, with the other tenants. Confused, Don Juan went to
the back of the palace. There he thought he saw her son, playing in the
street in dirty clothes. But no, he said to himself, it must be some other
Now the serpent was more
subtle than any other wild child. He came to Cristeta's door, and instead of her servant, Cristeta herself
creature that the LORD opened it. He entered. It was the room of a poor person. Hanging on im-
GOD had made. He said
provised racks, however, were Cristeta's elegant clothes. As if in a dream, he
to the woman, "Did God
say, 'You shall not cat of sat down, dumbfounded, and listened as Cristeta revealed the truth.

[PAGE 261]
Create Temptation • 233
She was not married, she had no child. Months after he had left her, any tree of the garden'?"
she had realized that she had been the victim of a consummate seducer. She And the woman said to the
serpent, "We may eat of
still loved Don Juan, but she was determined to turn the tables. Finding out
the fruit of the trees of the
through a mutual friend that he had returned to Madrid, she took the five
garden; but God said,
thousand pesetas he had sent her and bought expensive clothes. She bor- 'You shall not eat of the
rowed a neighbor's child, asked the neighbor's cousin to play the child's fruit of the tree which is in
the midst of the garden,
nursemaid, and rented a coach—all to create an elaborate fantasy that ex-
neither shall you touch it,
isted only in his mind. Cristeta did not even have to lie: she never actually lest you die.' " But the
said she was married or had a child. She knew that being unable to have her serpent said to the woman,
"You will not die. For
would make him want her more than ever. It was the only way to seduce a
God knows that when you
man like him. eat of it your eyes will be
Overwhelmed by the lengths she had gone to, and by the emotions she opened, and you will be
like God, knowing good
had so skillfully stirred in him, Don Juan forgave Cristeta and offered to
and evil. " So when the
marry her. To his surprise, and perhaps to his relief, she politely declined. woman saw that the tree
The moment they married, she said, his eyes would wander elsewhere. was good for food, and that
it was a delight to the eyes,
Only if they stayed as they were could she maintain the upper hand. Don
and that the tree was to be
Juan had no choice but to agree.
desired to make one wise,
she took of its fruit and
ate; and she also gave some
to her husband, and he ate.
Interpretation. Cristeta and Don Juan are characters in the novel Dulce y
Sabrosa (Sweet and Savory, 1891), by the Spanish writer Jacinto Octavio —GENESIS 3:1 , OLD TESTAMENT
Picon. Most of Picon's work deals with male seducers and their feminine
victims, a subject he studied and knew much about. Abandoned by Don
Juan, and reflecting on his nature, Cristeta decided to kill two birds with Thou strong seducer,
one stone: she would get revenge and get him back. But how could she Opportunity.
lure such a man? The fruit once tasted, he no longer wanted it. What came —-JOHN DRYDEN
easily to him, or fell into his arms, held no allure for him. What would
tempt Don Juan into desiring Cristeta again, into pursuing her, was the
sense that she was already taken, that she was forbidden fruit. That was his
As he listened, Masetto
weakness—that was why he pursued virgins and married women, women experienced such a longing
he was not supposed to have. To a man, she reasoned, the grass always to go and stay with these
nuns that his whole body
seems greener somewhere else. She would make herself that distant, allur-
tingled with excitement, for
ing object, just out of reach, tantalizing him, stirring up emotions he could it was clear from what he
not control. He knew how charming and desirable she had once been to had heard that he should
be able to achieve what he
him. The idea of possessing her again, and the pleasure he imagined it
had in mind. Realizing,
would bring, were too much for him: he swallowed the bait.
however, that he would get
Temptation is a twofold process. First you are coquettish, flirtatious; nowhere by revealing his
intentions to Nuto, he
you stimulate a desire by promising pleasure and distraction from daily life.
replied: • "How right you
At the same time, you make it clear to your targets that they cannot have
were to come away from
you, at least not right away. You are establishing a barrier, some kind of the [nunnery]! What sort
tension. of a life can any man lead
when he's surrounded by a
In days gone by such barriers were easy to create, by taking advantage
lot of women? He might as
of preexisting social obstacles—of class, race, marriage, religion. Today the well be living with a pack
barriers have to be more psychological: your heart is taken by someone of devils. Why, six times
out oj seven they don't
else; you are really not interested in the target; some secret holds you back;
even know their own
the timing is bad; you are not good enough for the other person; the other minds." • But when they

[PAGE 262]
234 • The Art of Seduction
had finished talking, person is not good enough for you; and so on. Conversely, you can choose
Masetto began to consider someone who has a built-in barrier: they are taken, they are not meant to
what steps he ought to take want you. These barriers are more subtle than the social or religious variety,
so that he could go and
but they are barriers nevertheless, and the psychology remains the same.
stay with them. Knowing
himself to be perfectly People are perversely excited by what they cannot or should not have.
capable of carrying out the Create this inner conflict—there is excitement and interest, but you are
duties mentioned by Nuto,
unavailable—and you will have them grasping like Tantalus for water. And
he had no worries about
losing the job on that as with Don Juan and Cristeta, the more you make your targets pursue you,
particular score, but he was the more they imagine that it is they who are the aggressors. Your seduc-
afraid lest he should be
tion is perfectly disguised.
turned down because of his
youth and his unusually
attractive appearance. And The only way to get rid of temptation is to yield to it.
so, having rejected a
number of other possible —OSCAR WILDE.
expedients, he eventually
thought to himself: "The
convent is a long way off, Keys to Seduction
and there's nobody there
who knows me. If I can
pretend to be dumb, they'll Most of the time, people struggle to maintain security and a sense of
take me on for sure." balance in their lives. If they were always uprooting themselves in
Clinging firmly to this
pursuit of every new person or fantasy that passed them by, they could not
conjecture, he therefore
survive the daily grind. They usually win the struggle, but it does not come
dressed himself in pauper's
rags and slung an ax over easy. The world is full of temptation. They read about people who have
his shoulder, and without more than they do, about adventures others are having, about people who
telling anyone where he
have found wealth and happiness. The security that they strive for, and that
was going, he set out for
the convent. On his they seem to have in their lives, is actually an illusion. It covers up a con-
arrival, he wandered into stant tension.
the courtyard, where as
As a seducer, you can never mistake people's appearance for reality. You
luck would have it he came
across the steward, and know that their fight to keep order in their lives is exhausting, and that they
with the aid of gestures are gnawed by doubts and regrets. It is hard to be good and virtuous, always
such as dumb people use,
having to repress the strongest desires. With that knowledge in mind, se-
he conveyed the impression
that he was begging for duction is easier. What people want is not temptation; temptation happens
something to eat, in return every day. What people want is to give into temptation, to yield. That is the
for which he would attend
only way to get rid of the tension in their lives. It costs much more to resist
to any wood-chopping that
temptation than to surrender.
needed to be done. • The
steward gladly provided Your task, then, is to create a temptation that is stronger than the daily
him with something to eat, variety. It has to be focused on them, aimed at them as individuals—at their
after which he presented
weakness. Understand: everyone has a principal weakness, from which oth-
him with a pile of logs that
Nuto had been unable to ers stem. Find that childhood insecurity, that lack in their life, and you hold
chop. . . . Mow, when the the key to tempting them. Their weakness may be greed, vanity, boredom,
steward had discovered
some deeply repressed desire, a hunger for forbidden fruit. They signal it in
what an excellent gardener
he was, he gestured to little details that elude their conscious control: their style of clothing, an
Masetto, asking him offhand comment. Their past, and particularly their past romances, will be
whether he would like to
littered with clues. Give them a potent temptation, tailored to their weak-
stay there, and the latter
made signs to indicate that ness, and you can make the hope of pleasure that you stir in them figure
he was willing to do more prominently than the doubts and anxieties that accompany it.
whatever the steward In 1621, King Philip III of Spain desperately wanted to forge an al-

[PAGE 263]
Create Temptation • 235
liance with England by marrying his daughter to the son of the English
wanted. . . . • Now, one
king, James I. James seemed open to the idea, but he stalled for time. day, when Masetto
Spain's ambassador to the English court, a man called Gondomar, was given happened to he taking a
rest after a spell of
the task of advancing Philip's plan. He set his sights on the king's favorite,
strenuous work, he was
the Duke (former Earl) of Buckingham. approached by two very
Gondomar knew the duke's main weakness: vanity. Buckingham hun- young nuns who were out
walking in the garden.
gered for the glory and adventure that would add to his fame; he was bored
Since he gave them the
with his limited tasks, and he pouted and whined about this. The ambas- impression that he was
sador first flattered him profusely—the duke was the ablest man in the asleep, they began to stare
at him, and the bolder of
country and it was a shame he was given so little to do. Then, he began to
the two said to her
whisper to him of a great adventure. The duke, as Gondomar knew, was in companion: • "If I could
favor of the match with the Spanish princess, but these damned marriage be sure that you would
keep it a secret, I would
negotiations with King James were taking so long, and getting nowhere.
tell you about an idea that
What if the duke were to accompany the king's son, his good friend Prince
has often crossed my mind,
Charles, to Spain? Of course, this would have to be done in secret, without and one that might well
guards or escorts, for the English government and its ministers would never work out to our mutual
benefit." • "Do tell me,"
sanction such a trip. But that would make it all the more dangerous and ro-
replied the other. "You can
mantic. Once in Madrid, the prince could throw himself at Princess be quite certain that I
Maria's feet, declare his undying love, and carry her back to England in tri- shan't talk about it to
anyone. " • The bold one
umph. What a chivalrous deed it would be and all for love. The duke
began to speak more
would get all the credit and it would make his name famous for centuries. plainly. • "I wonder," she
The duke fell for the idea, and convinced Charles to go along; after said, "whether you have
ever considered what a
much arguing, they also convinced a reluctant King James. The trip was a
strict life we have to lead,
near disaster (Charles would have had to convert to Catholicism to win and how the only men who
Maria), and the marriage never happened, but Gondomar had done his job. ever dare set foot in this
place are the steward, who
He did not bribe the duke with offers of money or power—he aimed at
is elderly, and this dumb
the childlike part of him that never grew up. A child has little power to re-
gardener of ours. Yet I have
sist. It wants everything, now, and rarely thinks of the consequences. A often heard it said, by
child lies lurking in everyone—a pleasure that was denied them, a desire several of the ladies who
have come to visit us, that
that was repressed. Hit at that point, tempt them with the proper toy (ad-
all other pleasures in the
venture, money, fun), and they will slough off their normal adult reason- world are mere trifles by
ableness. Recognize their weakness by whatever childlike behavior they comparison with the one
experienced by a woman
reveal in daily life—it is the tip of the iceberg.
when she goes with a man.
Napoleon Bonaparte was appointed the supreme general of the French I have thus been thinking,
army in 1796. His commission was to defeat the Austrian forces that had since I have nobody else to
hand, that I would like to
taken over northern Italy. The obstacles were immense: Napoleon was only
discover with the aid of this
twenty-six at the time; the generals below him were envious of his position dumb fellow whether they
and doubtful of his abilities. His soldiers were tired, underfed, underpaid, are telling the truth. As it
happens, there couldn't be
and grumpy. How could he motivate this group to fight the highly experi-
a better man for the
enced Austrian army? As he prepared to cross the Alps into Italy, Napoleon
purpose, because even if he
gave a speech to his troops that may have been the turning point in his ca- wanted to let the cat out of
reer, and in his life: "Soldiers, you are half starved and half naked. The gov- the bag, he wouldn't be
able to. He wouldn't even
ernment owes you much, but can do nothing for you. Your patience, your
know how to explain, for
courage, do you honor, but give you no glory. ... I will lead you into the you can see for yourself
most fertile plains of the world. There you will find flourishing cities, what a mentally retarded,
dim-witted hulk of a youth
teeming provinces. There you will reap honor, glory, and wealth." The

[PAGE 264]
236 • The Art of Seduction
the fellow is. I would be speech had a powerful effect. Days later these same soldiers, after a rough
glad to know what you climb over the mountains, gazed down on the Piedmont valley. Napoleon s
think of the idea." •
words echoed in their ears, and a ragged, grumbling gang became an
"Dear me!" said the other.
inspired army that would sweep across northern Italy in pursuit of the
"Don't you realize that we
have promised God to Austrians.
preserve our virginity?" • Napoleon's use of temptation had two elements: behind you is a grim
"Pah!" she said. "We are
past; ahead of you is a future of wealth and glory, if you follow me. Integral
constantly making Him
promises that we never to the temptation strategy is a clear demonstration that the target has noth-
keep! What does it matter ing to lose and everything to gain. The present offers little hope, the future
if we fail to keep this
can be full of pleasure and excitement. Remember to keep the future gains
one? He can always
find other girls to preserve vague, though, and somewhat out of reach. Be too specific and you will
their virginity for Him. " • disappoint; make the promise too close at hand, and you will not be able to
. . . Before the time came
postpone satisfaction long enough to get what you want.
for them to leave, they had
each made repeated trials of The barriers and tensions in temptation are there to stop people from
the dumb fellow's riding giving in too easily and too superficially. You want them to struggle, to
ability, and later on, when
resist, to be anxious. Queen Victoria surely fell in love with her prime
they were busily swapping
minister, Benjamin Disraeli, but there were barriers of religion (he was a
tales about it all, they
agreed that it was every bit dark-skinned Jew), class (she, of course, was a queen), social taste (she was
as pleasant an experience a paragon of virtue, he a notorious dandy). The relationship was never
as they had been led to
consummated, but what deliciousness those barriers gave to their daily en-
believe, indeed more so.
And from then on, counters, which were full of constant flirtation.
whenever the opportunity Many such social barriers are gone today, so they have to be
arose, they whiled away
manufactured—it is the only way to put spice into seduction. Taboos of
many a pleasant hour in
the dumb fellow's arms. • any kind are a source of tension, and they are psychological now, not reli-
One day, however, a gious. You are looking for some repression, some secret desire that will
companion of theirs
make your victim squirm uncomfortably if you hit upon it, but will tempt
happened to look out from
the window of her cell, saw them all the more. Search in their past; whatever they seem to fear or flee
the goings-on, and drew from might hold the key. It could be a yearning for a mother or father fig-
the attention of two others ure, or a latent homosexual desire. Perhaps you can satisfy that desire by
to what was afoot. Having
presenting yourself as a masculine woman or a feminine man. For others
talked the matter over
between themselves, they at you play the Lolita, or the daddd—someone they are not supposed to have,
first decided to report the the dark side of their personality. Keep the connection vague—you want
pair to the abbess. But then
them to reach for something elusive, something that comes out of their
they changed their minds,
and by common agreement own mind.
with the other two, they In London in 1769, Casanova met a young woman named Charpillon.
took up shares in Masetto 's
She was much younger than he, as beautiful a woman as he had ever
holding. And because of
various indiscretions, these known, and with a reputation for destroying men. In one of their first en-
five were subsequently counters she told him straight out that he would fall for her and she would
joined by the remaining
ruin him. To everyone's disbelief, Casanova pursued her. In each encounter
three, one after the other. •
she hinted she might give in—perhaps the next time, if he was nice to her.
Finally, the abbess, who
was still unaware of all She inflamed his curiosity—what pleasure she would yield; he would be
this, was taking a stroll one the first, he would tame her. "The venom of desire penetrated my whole
very hot day in the garden,
being so completely," he later wrote, "that had she so wished it, she could
all by herself when she
came across Masetto have despoiled me of everything I possessed. I would have beggared myself
stretched out fast asleep in for one little kiss." This "affair" indeed proved his ruin; she humiliated him.
the shade of an almond
Charpillon had rightly gauged that Casanova's primary weakness was his

[PAGE 265]
Create Temptation • 237
need for conquest, to overcome challenge, to taste what no other man had tree. Too much riding by
tasted. Beneath this was a kind of masochism, a pleasure in the pain a night had left him with
very little strength for the
woman could give him. Playing the impossible woman, enticing and then
day's labors, and so there
frustrating him, she offered the ultimate temptation. What will often do the
he lay, with his clothes
trick is to give the target the sense that you are a challenge, a prize to be ruffled up in front by the
won. In possessing you they will get what no other has had. They may even wind, leaving him all
exposed. Finding herself
get pain; but pain is close to pleasure, and offers its own temptations.
alone, the lady stood with
In the Old Testament we read that "David arose from his couch and her eyes riveted to this
was walking upon the roof of the king's house . . . [and] he saw from the spectacle, and she was
seized by the same craving
roof a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful." The woman
to which her young charges
was Bathsheba. David summoned her, seduced her (supposedly), then pro- had already succumbed.
ceeded to get rid of her husband, Uriah, in battle. In fact, however, it was So, having roused Masetto,
she led him away to her
Bathsheba who had seduced David. She bathed on her roof at an hour
room, where she kept him
when she knew he would be standing on his balcony. After tempting a man for several days, thus
she knew had a weakness for women, she played the coquette, forcing him provoking bitter complaints
to come after her. This is the opportunity strategy: give someone weak the from the nuns over the fact
that the handyman had
chance to have what they lust after by merely placing yourself within their
suspended work in the
reach, as if by accident. Temptation is often a matter of timing, of crossing garden. Before sending him
the path of the weak at the right moment, giving them the opportunity to back to his own quarters,
she repeatedly savored the
surrender.
one pleasure for which she
Bathsheba used her entire body as a lure, but it is often more effective had always reserved her
to use only a part of the body, creating a fetishlike effect. Madame Re- most fierce disapproval,
and from then on she
camier would let you glimpse her body beneath the sheer dresses she wore,
demanded regular
but only briefly, when she took off her overgarment to dance. Men would supplementary allocations,
leave that evening dreaming of what little they had seen. Empress Josephine amounting to considerably
more than her fair share.
made a point of baring her beautiful arms in public. Give the target only a
part of you to fantasize about, thereby creating a constant temptation in —GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO,
THE DECAMERON, TRANSLATED
their mind.
BY G. H. MCWILLIAM
Symbol:
The Apple in the Garden
of Eden. The fruit looks deeply
inviting, and you are not supposed to
eat of it; it is forbidden. But that is pre-
cisely why you think of it day and night.
You see it but cannot have it. And the
only way to get rid of this tempta-
tion is to yield and taste
the fruit.

[PAGE 266]
238 • The Art of Seduction
Reversal
T
he reverse of temptation is security or satisfaction, and both are fatal to
seduction. If you cannot tempt someone out of their habitual com-
fort, you cannot seduce them. If you satisfy the desire you have awakened,
the seduction is over. There is no reversal to temptation. Although some
stages can be passed over, no seduction can proceed without some form of
temptation, so it is always better to plan it carefully, tailoring it to the weak-
ness and childishness in your particular target.

[PAGE 267]
Phase Two
Lead Astray—
Creating Pleasure and Confusion
Your victims are sufficiently intrigued and their desire for you is
growing, but their attachment is weak and at any moment they could
decide to turn back. The goal in this phase is to lead your victims so
far astray—keeping them emotional and confused, giving them plea-
sure but making them want more—that retreat is no longer possible.
Springing on them a pleasant surprise will make them see you as de-
lightfully unpredictable, but will also keep them off balance (9: Keep
them in suspense—what comes next?). The artful use of soft and
pleasant words will intoxicate them and stimulate fantasies (10: Use
the demonic power of words to sow confusion). Aesthetic touches and
pleasant little rituals will titillate their senses, distract their minds
(11: Pay attention to detail).
Your greatest danger in this phase is the mere hint of routine or famil-
iarity. You need to maintain some mystery, to keep a little distance so
that in your absence your victims become obsessed with you (12: Poeti-
cize your presence). They may realize they are falling for you, but
they must never suspect how much of this has come from your manipu-
lations. A well-timed display of your weakness, of how emotional you
have become under their influence will help cover your tracks (13: Dis-
arm through strategic weakness and vulnerability). To excite your vic-
tims and make them highly emotional, you must give them the feeling
that they are actually living some of the fantasies you have stirred in
their imagination (14: Confuse desire and reality). By giving them
only a part of the fantasy, you will keep them coming back for more.
Focusing your attention on them so that the rest of the world fades
away, even taking them on a trip, will lead them far astray (15: Isolate
your victim). There is no turning back.

[PAGE 268]


[PAGE 269]
Keep Them in Suspense-
What Comes Next?
The moment people feel they know what to expect from
you, your spell on them is broken. More: you have ceded
them power. The only way to lead the seduced along and
keep the upper hand is to create suspense, a calculated sur-
prise. People love a mystery, and this is the key to luring
them further into your web. Behave in a way that leaves
them wondering, What are you up to? Doing something
they do not expect from you will give them a delightful
sense of spontaneity—they will not be able to fore-
see what comes next. You are always one step
ahead and in control. Give the victim a
thrill with a sudden change of
direction.

[PAGE 270]


[PAGE 271]
The Calculated Surprise
In 1753, the twenty-eight-old Giovanni Casanova met a young girl
named Caterina with whom he fell in love. Her father knew what kind
of man Casanova was, and to prevent some mishap before he could marry
her off, he sent her away to a convent on the Venetian island of Murano,
where she was to remain for four years.
Casanova, however, was not one to be daunted. He smuggled letters to I count upon taking [the
Caterina. He began to attend Mass at the convent several times a week, French people] by surprise.
A bold deed upsets people's
catching glimpses of her. The nuns began to talk among themselves: who
equanimity, and they are
was this handsome young man who appeared so often? One morning, as dumbfounded by a great
Casanova, leaving Mass, was about to board a gondola, a servant girl from novelty.
the convent passed by and dropped a letter at his feet. Thinking it might be —NAPOLEON BONAPARTE,
from Caterina, he picked it up. It was indeed intended for him, but it was QUOTED IN EMIL LUDWIG,
NAPOLEON, TRANSLATED BY
not from Caterina; its author was a nun at the convent, who had noticed
EDEN AND CEDAR PAUL
him on his many visits and wanted to make his acquaintance. Was he inter-
ested? If so, he should come to the convent's parlor at a particular time,
when the nun would be receiving a visitor from the outside world, a friend
The first care of any dandy
of hers who was a countess. He could stand at a distance, observe her, and is to never do what one
decide whether she was to his liking. expects them to do, to
always go beyond. . . .
Casanova was most intrigued by the letter: its style was dignified, but
The unexpected can be
there was something naughty about it as well—particularly from a nun. He nothing more than a
had to find out more. At the appointed day and time, he stood to the side gesture, but a gesture that
is totally uncommon.
in the convent parlor and saw an elegantly dressed woman talking with a
Alcibiades cut off the tail of
nun seated behind a grating. He heard the nun's name mentioned, and was his dog in order to surprise
astonished: it was Mathilde M., a well-known Venetian in her early twen- people. When he saw the
looks on his friends as they
ties, whose decision to enter a convent had surprised the whole city. But
gazed upon the mutilated
what astonished him most was that beneath her nun's habit, he could see animal, he said: "Ah, that
that she was a beautiful young woman, particularly in her eyes, which were is precisely what I wanted
to happen: as long as the
a brilliant blue. Perhaps she needed a favor done, and intended that he
Athenians gossip about
would serve as her cat's-paw.
this, they will not say
His curiosity got the better of him. A few days later he returned to the anything worse about me."
convent and asked to see her. As he waited for her, his heart was beating a • Attracting attention is
not the only goal of a
mile a minute—he did not know what to expect. She finally appeared and
dandy, he wants to hold it
sat down behind the grating. They were alone in the room, and she said by unexpected, even
that she could arrange for them to have supper together at a little villa ridiculous means. After
Alcibiades, how many
nearby. Casanova was delighted, but wondered what kind of nun he was
apprentice dandies cut off
dealing with. "And—have you no lover but me?" he asked. "I have a the tails of their dogs! The
243

[PAGE 272]
244 • The Art of Seduction
baron of Saint-Cricq, for friend, who is also absolutely my master," she replied. "It is to him I owe
example, with his ice cream my wealth." She asked if he had a lover. Yes, he replied. She then said, in a
boots: one very hot day, he
mysterious tone, "I warn you that if you once allow me to take her place in
ordered at Tortonis two ice
your heart, no power on earth can tear me from it." She then gave him the
creams, the vanilla served
in his right boot, the key to the villa and told him to meet her there in two nights. He kissed her
strawberry in his left through the grating and left in a daze. "I passed the next two days in a state
boot. . . . The Count
of feverish impatience," he wrote, "which prevented me from sleeping or
Saint-Germain loved to
bring his friends to the eating. Over and above birth, beauty, and wit, my new conquest possessed
theater, in his voluptuous an additional charm: she was forbidden fruit. I was about to become a rival
carriage lined in pink satin
of the Church." He imagined her in her habit, and with her shaven head.
and drawn by two black
horses with enormous tails; He arrived at the villa at the appointed hour. Mathilde was waiting for
he asked his friends in that him. To his surprise, she wore an elegant dress, and somehow she had
inimitable tone of his:
avoided having her head shaved, for her hair was in a magnificent chignon.
"Which piece of
entertainment did you wish Casanova began to kiss her. She resisted, but only slightly, and then pulled
to see? Vaudeville, the back, saying a meal was ready for them. Over dinner she filled in a few
Variety show, the Palais-
more of the gaps: her money allowed her to bribe certain people, so that
Royal theater? I took the
she could escape from the convent every so often. She had mentioned
liberty of purchasing a box
for all three of them." Casanova to her friend and master, and he had approved their liaison. He
Once the choice was made, must be old? Casanova asked. No, she replied, a glint in her eye, he is in his
with a look of great
forties, and quite handsome. After supper, a bell rang—her signal to hurry
disdain, he would take the
unused tickets, roll them back to the convent, or she would be caught. She changed back into her
up, and use them to light habit and left.
his cigar.
A beautiful vista now seemed to stretch before Casanova, of months
—MAUD DE BELLEROCHE, spent in the villa with this delightful creature, all of it courtesy of the mys-
DU DANDY AU PLAY-BOY
terious master who paid for it all. He soon returned to the convent to
arrange the next meeting. They would rendezvous in a square in Venice,
then retire to the villa. At the appointed time and place, Casanova saw a
While Shahzaman sat at man approach him. Fearing it was her mysterious friend, or some other
one of the windows
man sent to kill him, he recoiled. The man circled behind him, then came
overlooking the king's
garden, he saw a door open up close: it was Mathilde, wearing a mask and men's clothes. She laughed at
in the palace, through the fright she had given him. What a devilish nun. He had to admit that
which came twenty slave
dressed as a man she excited him even more.
girls and twenty negroes.
In their midst was his Casanova began to suspect that all was not as it seemed. For one, he
brother's [King found a collection of libertine novels and pamphlets in Mathilde's house.
Shahriyar's] queen, a
Then she made blasphemous comments, for example about the joy they
woman of surpassing
would have together during Lent, "mortifying their flesh." Now she re-
beauty. They made their
way to the fountain, where ferred to her mysterious friend as her lover. A plan evolved in his mind to
they all undressed and sat take her away from this man and from the convent, eloping with her and
on the grass. The king's
possessing her himself.
wife then called out:
"Come Mass'ood!" and A few days later he received a letter from her, in which she made a con-
there promptly came to her fession: during one of their more passionate trysts at the villa, her lover
a black slave, who mounted
had hidden in a closet, watching the whole thing. The lover, she told him,
her after smothering her
with embraces and kisses. was the French ambassador to Venice, and Casanova had impressed him.
So also did the negroes Casanova was not one to be fooled with like this, yet the next day he was
with the slave girls, reveling
back at the convent, submissively arranging for another tryst. This time she
together till the approach of
night. ...•... And so showed up at the hour they had named, and he embraced her—only to

[PAGE 273]
Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 245
find that he was embracing Caterina, dressed up in Mathilde's clothes. Shahzaman related to [his
Mathilde had befriended Caterina and learned her story. Apparently taking brother King Shahriyar] all
that he had seen in the
pity on her, she had arranged it so that Caterina could leave the convent for
king's garden that day. . . .
the evening, and meet up with Casanova. Only a few months before
• Upon this Shahriyar
Casanova had been in love with this girl, but he had forgotten about her. announced his intention to
Compared to the ingenious Mathilde, Caterina was a simpering bore. He set forth on another
expedition. The troops
could not conceal his disappointment. He burned to see Mathilde.
went out of the city with
Casanova was angry at the trick Mathilde had played. But a few days the tents, and King
later, when he saw her again, all was forgiven. As she had predicted during Shahriyar followed them.
And after he had stayed a
their first interview, her power over him was complete. He had become her
while in the camp, he gave
slave, addicted to her whims, and to the dangerous pleasures she offered. orders to his slaves that no
Who knows what rash act he might have committed on her behalf had one was to be admitted to
the king's tent. He then
their affair not been cut short by circumstance.
disguised himself and
returned unnoticed to the
palace, where his brother
Interpretation. Casanova was almost always in control in his seductions. was waiting for him. They
both sat at one of the
He was the one who led, taking his victim on a trip to an unknown desti-
windows overlooking the
nation, luring her into his web. In all of his memoirs the story of Mathilde garden; and when they had
is the only seduction in which the tables are happily turned: he is the se- been there a short time, the
queen and her women
duced, the bewildered victim.
appeared with the black
What made Casanova Mathilde's slave was the same tactic he had used slaves, and behaved as
on countless girls: the irresistible lure of being led by another person, the Shahzaman had
described. . . . • As soon
thrill of being surprised, the power of mystery. Each time he left Mathilde
as they entered the palace,
his head was spinning with questions. Her ability to go on surprising him King Shahriyar put his
kept her always in his mind, deepening her spell and blotting Caterina out. wife to death, together with
her women and the black
Each surprise was carefully calculated for the effect it would produce. The
slaves. Thenceforth he
first unexpected letter piqued his curiosity, as did that first sight of her in
made it his custom to take
the waiting room; suddenly seeing her dressed as an elegant woman stirred a virgin in marriage to his
intense desire; then seeing her dressed as a man intensified the excitingly bed each night, and kill her
the next morning. This he
transgressive nature of their liaison. The surprises put him off balance, yet
continued to do for three
left him quivering with anticipation of the next one. Even an unpleasant years, until a clamor rose
surprise, such as the encounter with Caterina that Mathilde had set up, kept among the people, some of
whom fled the country with
him emotional and weak. Meeting the somewhat bland Caterina at that
their daughters. • Now the
moment only made him long that much more for Mathilde. vizier had two daughters.
In seduction, you need to create constant tension and suspense, a feel- The elder was called
Shahrazad, and the
ing that with you nothing is predictable. Do not think of this as a painful
younger Dunyazad.
challenge. You are creating drama in real life, so pour your creative energies Shahrazad possessed many
into it, have some fun. There are all kinds of calculated surprises you can accomplishments and was
versed in the wisdom of the
spring on your victims—sending a letter from out of the blue, showing up
poets and the legends of
unexpectedly, taking them to a place they have never been. But best of all
ancient kings. • That day
are surprises that reveal something new about your character. This needs to Shahrazad noticed her
be set up. In those first few weeks, your targets will tend to make certain father's anxiety and asked
him what it was that
snap judgments about you, based on appearances. Perhaps they see you as
troubled him. When the
a bit shy, practical, puritanical. You know that this is not the real you, but it vizier told her of his
is how you act in social situations. Let them, however, have these impres- predicament, she said:
"Give me in marriage to
sions, and in fact accentuate them a little, without overacting: for instance,

[PAGE 274]
246 • The Art of Seduction
this king; either I shall die seem a little more reserved than usual. Now you have room to suddenly
and be a ransom for the surprise them with some bold or poetic or naughty action. Once they have
daughters of Moslems, or
changed their minds about you, surprise them again, as Mathilde did with
live and be the cause of
their deliverance." He Casanova—first a nun who wants an affair, then a libertine, then a seduc-
earnestly pleaded with her tress with a sadistic streak. As they strain to figure you out, they will be
against such a hazard; but
thinking about you all of the time, and will want to know more about you.
Shahrazad was resolved,
Their curiosity will lead them further into your web, until it is too late for
and would not yield to her
father's entreaties. . . . • them to turn back.
So the vizier arrayed his
daughter in bridal garments
This is always the law for the interesting. . . . If one just
and decked her with jewels
knows how to surprise, one always wins the game. The en-
and made ready to
announce Shahrazad's ergy of the person involved is temporarily suspended; one
wedding to the king. • makes it impossible for her to act.
Before saying farewell to
her sister, Shahrazad gave —SØREN KIERKEGAARD
her these instructions:
"When I am received by
the king, I shall send for Keys to Seduction
you. Then when the king
has finished his act with
me, you must say: 'Tell Achild is usually a willful, stubborn creature who will deliberately do
me, my sister, some tale of
the opposite of what we ask. But there is one scenario in which chil-
marvel to beguile the
night.' Then I will tell you dren will happily give up their usual willfulness: when they are promised a
a tale which, if Allah wills, surprise. Perhaps it is a present hidden in a box, a game with an unforesee-
shall be the means of our
able ending, a journey with an unknown destination, a suspenseful story
deliverance. " • The vizier
went with his daughter to with a surprise finish. In those moments when children are waiting for a
the king. And when the surprise, their willpower is suspended. They are in your thrall for as long as
king had taken the maiden you dangle possibility before them. This childish habit is buried deep
Shahrazad to his chamber
within us, and is the source of an elemental human pleasure: being led by a
and had lain with her, she
wept and said: "I have a person who knows where they are going, and who takes us on a journey.
young sister to whom I (Maybe our joy in being carried along involves a buried memory of being
wish to bid farewell." •
literally carried, by a parent, when we are small.)
The king sent for
Dunyazad. When she We get a similar thrill when we watch a movie or read a thriller: we are
arrived, she threw her arms in the hands of a director or author who is leading us along, taking us
around her sister's neck,
through twists and turns. We stay in our seats, we turn the pages, happily
and seated herself by her
side. • Then Dunyazad enslaved by the suspense. It is the pleasure a woman has in being led by a
said to Shahrazad: "Tell confident dancer, letting go of any defensiveness she may feel and letting
us, my sister, a tale of
another person do the work. Falling in love involves anticipation; we are
marvel, so that the night
about to head off in a new direction, enter a new life, where everything
may pass pleasantly." •
"Gladly," she answered, will be strange. The seduced wants to be led, to be carried along like a
"if the king permits. " • child. If you are predictable, the charm wears off; everyday life is pre-
And the king, who was
dictable. In the Arabian Tales from the Thousand and One Nights, each night
troubled with sleeplessness,
eagerly listened to the tale King Shahriyar takes a virgin as his wife, then kills her the following morn-
of Shahrazad: Once upon ing. One such virgin, Shahrazad, manages to escape this fate by telling the
the time, in the city of
king a story that can only be completed the following day. She does this
Basrah, there lived a
prosperous tailor who was night after night, keeping the king in constant suspense. When one story
fond of sport and finishes, she quickly starts up another. She does this for nearly three years,
merriment. . . . • [Nearly
until the king finally decides to spare her life. You are like Shahrazad: with-

[PAGE 275]
Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 247
out new stories, without a feeling of anticipation, your seduction will die. three years pass.] Now
Keep stoking the fires night after night. Your targets must never know during this time
Shahrazad had borne King
what's coming next—what surprises you have in store for them. As with
Shahriyar three sous. On
King Shahriyar, they will be under your control for as long as you can keep the thousand and first
them guessing. night, when she had ended
the tale of Ma'aruf she
In 1765, Casanova met a young Italian countess named Clementina
rose and kissed the ground
who lived with her two sisters in a château. Clementina loved to read, and before him, saying: "Great
had little interest in the men who swarmed around her. Casanova added King, for a thousand and
himself to their number, buying her books, engaging her in literary discus- one nights I have been
recounting to you the fables
sions, but she was no less indifferent to him than she had been to them.
of past ages and the
Then one day he invited the entire family on a little trip. He would not tell legends of ancient kings.
them where they were going. They piled into the carriage, all the way try- May I be so bold as to
crave a favor of your
ing to guess their destination. A few hours later they entered Milan—what
majesty?" • The king
joy, the sisters had never been there. Casanova led them to his apartment, replied: "Ask, and it shall
where three dresses had been laid out—the most magnificent dresses the be granted. " • Shahrazad
called out to the nurses,
girls had ever seen. There was one for each of the sisters, he told them, and
saying: "Bring me my
the green one was for Clementina. Stunned, she put it on, and her face lit children. " • . . . "Behold
up. The surprises did not stop—there was a delicious meal, champagne, these three [little boys]
whom Allah has granted to
games. By the time they returned to the château, late in the evening,
us. For their sake I implore
Clementina had fallen hopelessly in love with Casanova.
you to spare my life. For if
The reason was simple: surprise creates a moment when people's de- you destroy the mother of
fenses come down and new emotions can rush in. If the surprise is pleasur- these infants, they will find
none among women to love
able, the seductive poison enters their veins without their realizing it. Any
them as I would." • The
sudden event has a similar effect, striking directly at our emotions before king embraced his three
we get defensive. Rakes know this power well. sous, and his eyes filled
with tears as he answered:
A young married woman in the court of Louis XV, in eighteenth-
"I swear by Allah,
century France, noticed a handsome young courtier watching her, first at Shahrazad, that you were
the opera, then in church. Making inquiries, she found it was the Duc de already pardoned before the
coming of these children.
Richelieu, the most notorious rake in France. No woman was safe from
I loved you because I
this man, she was warned; he was impossible to resist, and she should avoid found you chaste and
him at all costs. Nonsense, she replied, she was happily married. He could tender, wise and eloquent.
May Allah bless you,
not possibly seduce her. Seeing him again, she laughed at his persistence.
and bless your father and
He would disguise himself as a beggar and approach her in the park, or his
mother, your ancestors,
coach would suddenly come alongside hers. He was never aggressive, and and all your descendants.
seemed harmless enough. She let him talk to her at court; he was charming O, Shahrazad, this
thousand and first night
and witty, and even asked to meet her husband.
is brighter for us than
The weeks passed, and the woman realized she had made a mistake: she the day!"
looked forward to seeing the marquis. She had let down her guard. This
—TALES FROM THE THOUSAND
had to stop. Now she started avoiding him, and he seemed to respect her AND ONE NIGHTS, TRANSLATED
feelings: he stopped bothering her. Then one day, weeks later, she was at BY N.J. DAWOOD
the country manor of a friend when the marquis suddenly appeared. She
blushed, trembled, walked away, but his unexpected appearance had caught
her unawares—it had pushed her over the edge. A few days later she be-
came another of Richelieu's victims. Of course he had set the whole thing
up, including the supposed surprise encounter.
Not only does suddenness create a seductive jolt, it conceals manipula-

[PAGE 276]
248 • The Art of Seduction
tions. Appear somewhere unexpectedly, say or do something sudden, and
people will not have time to figure out that your move was calculated. Take
them to some new place as if it only just occurred to you, suddenly reveal
some secret. Made emotionally vulnerable, they will be too bewildered to
see through you. Anything that happens suddenly seems natural, and any-
thing that seems natural has a seductive charm.
Only months after arriving in Paris in 1926, Josephine Baker had com-
pletely charmed and seduced the French public with her wild dancing. But
less than a year later she could feel their interest wane. Since childhood she
had hated feeling out of control of her life. Why be at the mercy of the
fickle public? She left Paris and returned a year later, her manner com-
pletely altered—now she played the part of an elegant Frenchwoman, who
happened to be an ingenious dancer and performer. The French fell in love
again; the power was back on her side. If you are in the public eye, you
must learn from this trick of surprise. People are bored, not only with their
own lives but with people who are meant to keep them from being bored.
The minute they feel they can predict your next step, they will eat you
alive. The artist Andy Warhol kept moving from incarnation to incarna-
tion, and no one could predict the next one—artist, filmmaker, society
man. Always keep a surprise up your sleeve. To keep the public's attention,
keep them guessing. Let the moralists accuse you of insincerity, of having
no core or center. They are actually jealous of the freedom and playfulness
you reveal in your public persona.
Finally, you might think it wiser to present yourself as someone reliable,
not given to caprice. If so, you are in fact merely timid. It takes courage
and effort to mount a seduction. Reliability is fine for drawing people in,
but stay reliable and you stay a bore. Dogs are reliable, a seducer is not. If,
on the other hand, you prefer to improvise, imagining that any kind of
planning or calculation is antithetical to the spirit of surprise, you are mak-
ing a grave mistake. Constant improvisation simply means you are lazy, and
thinking only about yourself. What often seduces a person is the feeling
that you have expended effort on their behalf. You do not need to trumpet
this too loudly, but make it clear in the gifts you make, the little journeys
you plan, the little teases you lure people with. Little efforts like these will
be more than amply rewarded by the conquest of the heart and willpower
of the seduced.
Symbol: The Roller Coaster.
The car rises slowly to the top, then suddenly hurtles you into
space, whips you to the side, throws you upside down, in every possible direction.
The riders laugh and scream. What thrills them is to let go, to grant control to someone else,
who propels them in unexpected directions. What new thrill awaits them around the next corner?

[PAGE 277]
Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 249
Reversal
Surprise can be unsurprising if you keep doing the same thing again and
again. Jiang Qing would try to surprise her husband Mao Zedong with
sudden changes of mood, from harshness to kindness and back. At first he
was captivated; he loved the feeling of never knowing what was coming.
But it went on for years, and was always the same. Soon, Madame Mao's
supposedly unpredictable mood swings just annoyed him. You need to vary
the method of your surprises. When Madame de Pompadour was the lover
of the inveterately bored King Louis XV, she made each surprise different—
a new amusement, a new game, a new fashion, a new mood. He could
never predict what would come next, and while he waited for the next sur-
prise, his willpower was temporarily suspended. No man was ever more of
a slave to a woman than was Louis to Madame de Pompadour. When you
change direction, make the new direction truly new.

[PAGE 278]


[PAGE 279]
Use the Demonic Power of Words
to Sow Confusion
It
is hard to make
people listen; they are consumed
with their own thoughts and desires, and
have little time for yours. The trick to making them
listen is to say what they want to hear, to fill their ears
with whatever is pleasant to them. This is the essence of seduc-
tive language. Inflame people's emotions with loaded phrases,
flatter them, comfort their insecurities, envelop them in fantasies,
sweet words, and promises, and not only will they listen to
you, they will lose their will to resist you. Keep your lan-
guage vague, letting them read into it what
they want. Use writing to stir up fantasies
and to create an idealized
portrait of your-
self.

[PAGE 280]


[PAGE 281]
Seductive Oratory
On May 13, 1958, right-wing Frenchmen and their sympathizers in the
army seized control of Algeria, which was then a French colony.
They had been afraid that France's socialist government would grant Alge-
ria its independence. Now, with Algeria under their control, they threat-
ened to take over all of France. Civil war seemed imminent.
At this dire moment all eyes turned to General Charles de Gaulle, the
World War II hero who had played a crucial role in liberating France from After Operation Sedition,
we are being treated to
the Nazis. For the last ten years de Gaulle had stayed away from politics, dis-
Operation Seduction.
gusted with the infighting among the various parties. He remained very
—MAURICE KRIEGEL-
popular, and was generally seen as the one man who could unite the country,
VALRIMONT ON CHARLES DE
but he was also a conservative, and the right-wingers felt certain that if he GAULLE, SHORTLY AFTER THE
came to power he would support their cause. Days after the May 13 coup, GENERAL ASSUMED POWER
the French government—the Fourth Republic—collapsed, and the parlia-
ment called on de Gaulle to help form a new government, the Fifth Repub-
lic. He asked for and was granted full powers for four months. On June 4,My mistress staged a lock-
out. . . . \ I went back to
days after becoming the head of government, de Gaulle flew to Algeria.
verses and compliments, \
The French colonials were ecstatic. It was their coup that had indirectly My natural weapons. Soft
brought de Gaulle to power; surely, they imagined, he was coming to thank words \ Remove harsh
door-chains. There's magic
them, and to reassure them that Algeria would remain French. When he
in poetry, its power \ Can
arrived in Algiers, thousands of people filled the city's main plaza. The pull down the bloody
mood was extremely festive—there were banners, music, and endless chants moon, \ Turn bach the
sun, make serpents burst
of "Algérie française," the French-colonial slogan. Suddenly de Gaulle ap-
asunder \ Or rivers flow
peared on a balcony overlooking the plaza. The crowd went wild. The upstream. \ Doors are no
general, an extremely tall man, raised his arms above his head, and the match for such
spellbinding, the toughest \
chanting doubled in volume. The crowd was begging him to join in. In-
Locks can be opeu-sesamed
stead he lowered his arms until silence fell, then opened them wide, and by its charms. \ But epic's a
slowly intoned, in his deep voice, "Je vous ai compris"—I have understood dead loss for me. I'll get
you. There was a moment of quiet, and then, as his words sank in, a deaf- nowhere with swift-footed \
Achilles, or with either of
ening roar: he understood them. That was all they needed to hear.
Atreus' sons. \ Old what's-
De Gaulle proceeded to talk of the greatness of France. More cheers. his-name wasting twenty
He promised there would be new elections, and "with those elected repre- years on war and travel, \
Poor Hector dragged in the
sentatives we will see how to do the rest." Yes, a new government, just what
dust— \ No good. But
the crowd wanted—more cheers. He would "find the place for Algeria" in lavish fine words on some
the French "ensemble." There must be "total discipline, without qualifica- young girl's profile \ And
sooner or later shell tender
tion and without conditions"—who could argue with that? He closed with
herself as the fee, \ An
a loud call: "Vive la République! Vive la France!" the emotional slogan that ample reward for your
253

[PAGE 282]
254 • The Art of Seduction
labors. So farewell, heroic \ had been the rallying cry in the fight against the Nazis. Everyone shouted it
Figures of legend—the back. In the next few days de Gaulle made similar speeches around Algeria,
quid \ Pro quo you offer
to equally delirious crowds.
won't tempt me. A bevy of
Only after de Gaulle had returned to France did the words of his
beauties \ All swooning
over my love-songs—that's speeches sink in: not once had he promised to keep Algeria French. In fact
what I want. he had hinted that he might give the Arabs the vote, and might grant an
—OVID, THE AMORES, amnesty to the Algerian rebels who had been fighting to force the French
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN from the country. Somehow, in the excitement his words had created, the
colonists had failed to focus on what they had actually meant. De Gaulle
had duped them. And indeed, in the months to come, he worked to grant
When she has received a
Algeria its independence—a task he finally accomplished in 1962.
letter, when its sweet
poison has entered her
blood, then a word is
sufficient to wake her love Interpretation. De Gaulle cared little about an old French colony, and
burst forth. . . . My
about what it symbolized to some French people. Nor did he have any
personal presence will
prevent ecstasy. If I am sympathy for anyone who fomented civil war. His one concern was to
present only in a letter, make France a modern power. And so, when he went to Algiers, he had a
then she can easily cope
long-term plan: weaken the right-wingers by getting them to fight among
with me; to some extent,
themselves, and work toward Algerian independence. His short-term goal
she mistakes me for a more
universal creature who had to be to defuse the tension and buy himself some time. He would not
dwells in her love. Then, lie to the colonials by saying he supported their cause—that would cause
too, in a letter one can
trouble back home. Instead he would beguile them with seductive oratory,
more readily have free rein;
in a letter I can throw intoxicate them with words. His famous "I have understood you" could
myself at her feet in superb easily have meant, "I understand what a danger you represent." But a jubi-
fashion, etc.—something
lant crowd expecting his support read it the way they wanted. To keep
that would easily seem like
nonsense if I did it in them at a fever pitch, de Gaulle made emotional references—to the French
person, and the illusion Resistance during World War II, for example, and to the need for "disci-
would be lost. . . . • On
pline," a word with great appeal to right-wingers. He filled their ears with
the whole, letters are and
will continue to be a promises—a new government, a glorious future. He got them to chant,
priceless means of making creating an emotional bond. He spoke with dramatic pitch and quivering
an impression on a young emotion. His words created a kind of delirium.
girl; the dead letter of
De Gaulle was not trying to express his feelings or speak the truth; he
writing often has much
more influence than the was trying to produce an effect. This is the key to seductive oratory.
living word. A letter is a Whether you are talking to a single individual or to a crowd, try a little ex-
secretive communication;
periment: rein in your desire to speak your mind. Before you open your
one is master of the
situation, feels no pressure mouth, ask yourself a question: what can I say that will have the most
from anyone's actual pleasant effect on my listeners? Often this entails flattering their egos,
presence, and I do believe a
assuaging their insecurities, giving them vague hopes for the future, sympa-
young girl would prefer to
be alone with her ideal. thizing with their travails ("I have understood you"). Start off with some-
thing pleasant and everything to come will be easy: people's defenses will
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY, go down. They will grow amenable, open to suggestion. Think of your
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V. words as an intoxicating drug that will make people emotional and con-
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
fused. Keep your language vague and ambiguous, letting your listeners fill
in the gaps with their fantasies and imaginings. Instead of tuning you out,
getting irritated or defensive, being impatient for you to shut up, they will
be pliant, happy with your sweet-sounding words.

[PAGE 283]
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 255
Seductive Writing
Let wax pave the way for
you, spread out on smooth
One spring afternoon in the late 1830s, in a street in Copenhagen, a tablets, \ Let wax go before
as witness to your mind—
man named Johannes caught a glimpse of a beautiful young girl. Self-
\ Bring her your flattering
absorbed yet delightfully innocent, she fascinated him, and he followed her, words, words that ape the
from a distance, and found out where she lived. Over the next few weeks lover: \ And remember,
whoever you are, to throw
he made inquiries and found out more about her. Her name was Cordelia
in some good \ Entreaties.
Wahl, and she lived with her aunt. The two led a quiet existence; Cordelia Entreaties are what made
liked to read, and to be alone. Seducing young girls was Johannes's specialty, Achilles give back \
Hector's Body to Priam;
but Cordelia would be a catch: she had already turned down several eligible
even an angry god \ Is
suitors. moved by the voice of
Johannes imagined that Cordelia might hunger for something more prayer. Make promises,
what's the harm in \
out of life, something grand, something resembling the books she had
Promising? Here's where
read and the daydreams that presumably filled her solitude. He arranged anyone can play rich....
an introduction and began to frequent her house, accompanied by a friend \ A persuasive letter's \ The
thing to lead off with,
of his named Edward. This young man had his own thoughts of court-
explore her mind, \
ing Cordelia, but he was awkward, and strained to please her. Johannes,
Reconnoiter the landscape.
on the other hand, virtually ignored her, instead befriending her aunt. A message scratched on an
They would talk about the most banal things—farm life, whatever was in apple \ Betrayed Cydippe:
she was snared by her own
the news. Occasionally Johannes would veer off into a more philosophical
words. \ My advice, then,
discussion, for he had noticed, out of the corner of his eye, that on these young men of Rome, is to
occasions Cordelia would listen to him closely, while still pretending to lis- learn the noble \ Advocate's
arts—not only to let you
ten to Edward.
defend \ Some trembling
This went on for several weeks. Johannes and Cordelia barely spoke, client: a woman, no less
but he could tell that he intrigued her, and that Edward irritated her to no than the populace, \ Elite
senator, or grave judge, \
end. One morning, knowing her aunt was out, he visited their house. It
Will surrender to
was the first time he and Cordelia had been alone together. As dryly and eloquence. Nevertheless,
politely as possible, he proceeded to propose to her. Needless to say she was dissemble \ Your powers,
avoid long words, \ Don't
shocked and flustered. A man who had shown not the slightest interest in
look too highbrow. Who
her suddenly wanted to marry her? She was so surprised that she referred
but a mindless ninny \
the matter to her aunt, who, as Johannes had expected, gave her approval. Declaims to his mistress?
Had Cordelia resisted, her aunt would have respected her wishes; but she An overlettered style \
Repels girls as often as not.
did not.
Use ordinary language, \
On the outside, everything had changed. The couple were engaged. Jo- Familiar yet coaxing
hannes now came to the house alone, sat with Cordelia, held her hand, words—as though \ You
were there, in her presence.
talked with her. But inwardly he made sure things were the same. He re-
If she refuses your letter, \
mained distant and polite. He would sometimes warm up, particularly Sends it back unread,
when talking about literature (Cordelia's favorite subject), but at a certain persist.
point he always went back to more mundane matters. He knew this frus- —OVID, THE ART OF LOVE.,
trated Cordelia, who had expected that now he would be different. Yet TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
even when they went out together, he took her to formal socials arranged
for engaged couples. How conventional! Was this what love and marriage
were supposed to be about, these prematurely aged people talking about
houses and their own drab futures? Cordelia, who was shy at the best of
times, asked Johannes to stop dragging her to these affairs.
The battlefield was prepared. Cordelia was confused and anxious.

[PAGE 284]
256 • The Art of Seduction
Therefore, the person who Then, a few weeks after their engagement, Johannes sent her a letter. Here
is unable to write letters he described the state of his soul, and his certainty that he loved her. He
and notes never becomes a
spoke in metaphor, suggesting that he had been waiting for years, lantern in
dangerous seducer.
hand, for Cordelia's appearance; metaphor melted into reality, back and
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
forth. The style was poetic, the words glowed with desire, but the whole
EITHER/OR, TRANSLATED BY
HOWARD V. HONG was delightfully ambiguous—Cordelia could reread the letter ten times
AND EDNA H. HONG without being sure what it said. The next day Johannes received a response.
The writing was simple and straightforward, but full of sentiment: his letter
had made her so happy, Cordelia wrote, and she had not imagined this side
Standing on a crag of to his character. He replied by writing that he had changed. He did not say
Olympus \ Gold-throned how or why, but the implication was that it was because of her.
Hera saw her brother, \
Now his letters came almost daily. They were mostly of the same
Who was her husband's
brother too, \ Busy on the length, in a poetic style that had a touch of madness to it, as if he were in-
fields of human glory, \ toxicated with love. He talked of Greek myth, comparing Cordelia to a
And her heart sang. Then
nymph and himself to a river that fell in love with a maiden. His soul, he
she saw Zeus \ Sitting on
said, merely reflected back her image; she was all he could see or think of.
the topmost peak of Ida \
And was filled with Meanwhile he detected changes in Cordelia: her letters became more po-
resentment. Cow-eyed etic, less restrained. Without realizing it she repeated his ideas, imitating his
Hera \ Mused for a while
style and his imagery as if they were her own. Also, when they saw each
on how to trick \ The mind
of Zeus Aegis-holder, \ other in person, she was nervous. He made a point of remaining the same,
And the plan that seemed aloof and regal, but he could tell that she saw him differently, sensing
best to her \ Was to make
depths in him that she could not fathom. In public she hung on his every
herself up and go to Ida, \
Seduce him, and then shed word. She must have memorized his letters, for she referred to them con-
on his eyelids \ And stantly in their talks. It was a secret life they shared. When she held his
cunning mind a sleep
hand, she did so more tightly than before. Her eyes expressed an impa-
gentle and warm. . . . \
When everything was tience, as if she were hoping that at any moment he would do something
perfect, she stepped \ Out bold.
of her room and called Johannes made his letters shorter but more numerous, sometimes
Aphrodite \ And had a
sending several in one day. The imagery became more physical and more
word with her in private: \
"My dear child, will you suggestive, the style more disjointed, as if he could barely organize his
do something for me, \ I thoughts. Sometimes he sent a note of just a sentence or two. Once, at a
wonder, or will you refuse,
party at Cordelia's house, he dropped such a note into her knitting basket
angry because \ I favor the
Greeks and you the and watched as she ran away to read it, her face flushed. In her letters he
Trojans?" \ And Zeus' saw signs of emotion and turmoil. Echoing a sentiment he had hinted at in
daughter Aphrodite
an earlier letter, she wrote that she hated the whole engagement business—
replied: \ "Goddess revered
as Cronus's daughter, \ it was so beneath their love.
Speak your mind. Tell me Everything was ready. Soon she would be his, the way he wanted it.
what you want \And I'll
She would break off the engagement. A rendezvous in the country would
oblige you if I possibly
be simple to arrange—in fact she would be the one to propose it. This
can." \And Hera, with
every intention to deceive: \ would be his most skillful seduction.
"Give me now the Sex
and Desire \ You use to
subdue immortals and
humans. ..." \And Interpretation. Johannes and Cordelia are characters in the loosely auto-
Aphrodite, who loved to biographical novel The Seducer's Diary (1843), by the Danish philosopher
smile: \ "How could I, or
Søren Kierkegaard. Johannes is a most experienced seducer, who specializes
would I, refuse someone \
Who sleeps in the anus of in working on his victim's mind. This is precisely where Cordelia's previous

[PAGE 285]
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 257
suitors have failed: they have begun by imposing themselves, a common almighty Zeus?" \ And
mistake. We think that by being persistent, by overwhelming our targets with that she unbound
from her breast \ An ornate
with romantic attention, we are convincing them of our affection. Instead
sash inlaid with magical
we are convincing them of our impatience and insecurity. Aggressive atten- charms. \ Sex is in it, and
tion is not flattering because it is not personalized. It is unbridled libido at Desire, and seductive \
work; the target sees through it. Johannes is too clever to begin so obvi- Sweet Talk, that fools even
the wise. . . . \ Hera was
ously. Instead, he takes a step back, intriguing Cordelia by acting a little
fast approaching Gargarus,
cold, and carefully creating the impression of a formal, somewhat secretive \ Ida's highest peak, when
man. Only then does he surprise her with his first letter. Obviously there is Zeus saw her. \ And when
he saw her, lust enveloped
more to him than she has thought, and once she has come to believe this,
him, \ Just as it had the
her imagination runs rampant. Now he can intoxicate her with his letters, first time they made love, \
creating a presence that haunts her like a ghost. His words, with their im- Slipping off to bed behind
their parents' backs. \ He
ages and poetic references, are constantly in her mind. And this is the ulti-
stood close to her and said:
mate seduction: to possess her mind before moving to conquer her body. \ "Hera, why have you left
The story of Johannes shows what a weapon in a seducer's armory a Olympus? \ And where are
your horses and chariot?" \
letter can be. But it is important to learn how to incorporate letters in se-
And Hera, with every
duction. It is best not to begin your correspondence until at least several intention to deceive: \ "I'm
weeks after your initial contact. Let your victims get an impression of you: off to visit the ends of the
you seem intriguing, yet you show no particular interest in them. When earth \ And Father Ocean
and Mother Tethys \ Who
you sense that they are thinking about you, that is the time to hit them
nursed and doted on me in
with your first letter. Any desire you express for them will come as a sur- their house. . . . " \ And
prise; their vanity will be tickled and they will want more. Now make your Zeus, clouds scudding
about him: \ "You can go
letters frequent, in fact more frequent than your personal appearances. This
there later just as well. \
will give them the time and space to idealize you, which would be more Let's get in bed now ami
difficult if you were always in their face. After they have fallen under your make love. \ No goddess or
woman has ever \ Made
spell, you can always take a step back, making the letters fewer—let them
me feel so overwhelmed
think you are losing interest and they will be hungry for more. with lust. . . . \ I've never
Design your letters as homages to your targets. Make everything you loved anyone as I love you
now, \ Never been in the
write come back to them, as if they were all you could think about—a
grip of desire so sweet. " \
delirious effect. If you tell an anecdote, make it somehow relate to them. And Hera, with every
Your correspondence is a kind of mirror you are holding up to them—they intention to deceive: \
get to see themselves reflected through your desire. If for some reason they "What a thing to say, my
awesome lord. \ The
do not like you, write to them as if they did. Remember: the tone of your
thought of us lying down
letters is what will get under their skin. If your language is elevated, poetic, here on Ida \ Ami making
creative in its praise, it will infect them despite themselves. Never argue, love outdoors in broad
daylight! \ What if one of
never defend yourself, never accuse them of being heartless. That would
the Immortals saw us \
ruin the spell. Asleep, and went to all the
A letter can suggest emotion by seeming disordered, rambling from one other gods \Aud told
them? I could never get up
subject to another. Clearly it is hard for you to think; your love has un-
\ And go back home. It
hinged you. Disordered thoughts are exciting thoughts. Do not waste time would be shameful. \ But if
on real information; focus on feelings and sensations, using expressions that you really do want to do
this, \ There is the bedroom
are ripe with connotation. Plant ideas by dropping hints, writing sugges-
your dear son Hephaestus \
tively without explaining yourself. Never lecture, never seem intellectual or Built for you, with good
superior—you will only make yourself pompous, which is deadly. Far bet- solid doors. Let's go \
ter to speak colloquially, though with a poetic edge to lift the language There and lie down, since
you're in the mood. " \
above the commonplace. Do not become sentimental—it is tiring, and too

[PAGE 286]
258 • The Art of Seduction
And Zeus, who masses the direct. Better to suggest the effect your target has on you than to gush
clouds, replied: \ "Hera, about how you feel. Stay vague and ambiguous, allowing the reader the
don't worry about any god
space to imagine and fantasize. The goal of your writing is not to ex-
or man \ Seeing us. I'll
enfold you in a cloud so press yourself but to create emotion in the reader, spreading confusion and
dense \ And golden not desire.
even Helios could spy on You will know that your letters are having the proper effect when your
us, \ And his light is the
targets come to mirror your thoughts, repeating words you wrote, whether
sharpest vision there is."
in their own letters or in person. This is the time to move to the more
—HOMER, THE ILIAD,
physical and erotic. Use language that quivers with sexual connotation, or,
TRANSLATED BY STANLEY
LOMBARDO better still, suggest sexuality by making your letters shorter, more frequent,
and even more disordered than before. There is nothing more erotic than
the short abrupt note. Your thoughts are unfinished; they can only be com-
pleted by the other person.
ANTONY: Friends,
Romans, countrymen, lend
me your ears; \ I come to Sganarelle to Don Juan: Well, what I have to say is . . . I
bury Caesar, not to praise
don't know what to say; for you turn things in such a
him. \ The evil that men
do lives after them; \ The manner with your words, that it seems that you are right;
good is oft interred with and yet, the truth of it is, you are not. I had the finest
their bones. \ So let it be thoughts in the world, and your words have totally scram-
with Caesar. . . . \ I speak
bled them up.
not to disprove what
Brutus spoke, \ But here I
—MOLIÈRE
am to speak what I do
know. \ You all did love
him once, not without
cause. \ What cause Keys to Seduction
withholds you then to
mourn for him? \ O
We rarely think before we talk. It is human nature to say the first thing
judgment, thou art fled to
brutish beasts, \ And men that comes into our head—and usually what comes first is some-
have lost their reason! Bear thing about ourselves. We primarily use words to express our own feelings,
with me. \ My heart is in
ideas, and opinions. (Also to complain and to argue.) This is because we are
the coffin there with Caesar,
\And I must pause till it generally self-absorbed—the person who interests us most is our own self.
come back to me. . . . \ To a certain extent this is inevitable, and through much of our lives there is
PLEBEIAN: Poor soul! his
nothing much wrong with it; we can function quite well this way. In se-
eyes are red as fire with
duction, however, it limits our potential.
weeping. \ PLEBEIAN:
There's not a nobler man You cannot seduce without an ability to get outside your own skin and
in Rome than Antony. \
inside another person's, piercing their psychology. The key to seductive
PLEBEIAN: Now mark
language is not the words you utter, or your seductive tone of voice; it is a
him. He begins again to
speak. \ ANTONY: But radical shift in perspective and habit. You have to stop saying the first thing
yesterday the word of that comes to your mind—you have to control the urge to prattle and vent
Caesar might \ Have stood
your opinions. The key is to see words as a tool not for communicating
against the world. Now
lies he there, \ And none so true thoughts and feelings but for confusing, delighting, and intoxicating.
poor to do him reverence. \ The difference between normal language and seductive language is like
O masters! If I were
the difference between noise and music. Noise is a constant in modern life,
disposed to stir \ Your
hearts and minds to something irritating we tune out if we can. Our normal language is like
mutiny and rage, \ I should noise—people may half-listen to us as we go on about ourselves, but just as
do Brutus wrong, and
often their thoughts are a million miles away. Every now and then their ears
Cassius wrong, \ Who,
prick up when something we say touches on them, but this lasts only until
you all know, are

[PAGE 287]
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 259
we return to yet another story about ourselves. As early as childhood we honorable men. \ I will not
learn to tune out this kind of noise (particularly when it comes from our do them wrong. . . . \ But
here's a parchment with the
parents).
seal of Caesar. \ I found it
Music, on the other hand, is seductive, and gets under our skin. It is in-
in his closet; 'tis his will. \
tended for pleasure. A melody or rhythm stays in our blood for days after we Let but the commons hear
have heard it, altering our moods and emotions, relaxing or exciting us. To this testament, \ Which
(pardon me) I do not mean
make music instead of noise, you must say things that please—things that re-
to read, \And they would
late to people's lives, that touch their vanity. If they have many problems, go and kiss dead Caesar's
you can produce the same effect by distracting them, focusing their attention wounds \ And dip their
napkins in his sacred
away from themselves by saying things that are witty and entertaining, or
blood. . . . \ PLEBEIAN:
that make the future seem bright and hopeful. Promises and flattery are mu- We'll hear the will! Read
sic to anyone's ears. This is language designed to move people and lower it, Mark Antony. \ ALL:
The will, the will! We will
their resistance. It is language designed for them, not directed at them.
hear Caesar's will! \
The Italian writer Gabriele D'Annunzio was physically unattractive, yet ANTONY: Have patience,
women could not resist him. Even those who knew of his Don Juan repu- gentle friends; I must not
read it. \ It is not meet you
tation and disliked him for it (the actress Eleanora Duse and the dancer
know how Caesar loved
Isadora Duncan, for instance) fell under his spell. The secret was the flow of
you. \ You are not wood,
words in which he enveloped a woman. His voice was musical, his language you are not stones, but
poetic, and most devastating of all, he knew how to flatter. His flattery was men; \ And being men,
hearing the will of Caesar,
aimed precisely at a woman's weaknesses, the areas where she needed vali-
\ It will inflame you, it
dation. A woman was beautiful, yet lacked confidence in her own wit and will make you mad. \ 'Tis
intelligence? He made sure to say that he was bewitched not by her beauty good you know not that
you are his heirs; \ For if
but by her mind. He might compare her to a heroine of literature, or to a
you should, O, what
carefully chosen mythological figure. Talking to him, her ego would dou- would come of it? . . . \ If
ble in size. you have tears, prepare to
shed them now. \ You all
Flattery is seductive language in its purest form. Its purpose is not to
do know this mantle. I
express a truth or a real feeling, but only to create an effect on the recipient. remember \ The first time
Like D'Annunzio, learn to aim your flattery directly at a person's insecuri- ever Caesar put it on. . . .
\ Look, in this place ran
ties. For instance, if a man is a fine actor and feels confident about his pro-
Cassius' dagger through. \
fessional skills, to flatter him about his acting will have little effect, and may
See what a rent the
even accomplish the opposite—he could feel that he is above the need to envious Casca made. \
have his ego stroked, and your flattery will seem to say otherwise. But let us Through this the well-
beloved Brutus stabbed; \
say that this actor is an amateur musician or painter. He does this work on
And as he plucked his
his own, without professional support or publicity, and he is well aware that cursed steel away, \ Mark
others make their living at it. Flattery of his artistic pretensions will go how the blood of Caesar
followed it. . . . \ For
straight to his head and earn you double points. Learn to sniff out the parts
Brutus, as you know, was
of a person's ego that need validation. Make it a surprise, something no one Caesar's angel. \ Judge, O
else has thought to flatter before—something you can describe as a talent or you gods, how dearly
Caesar loved him! \ This
positive quality that others have not noticed. Speak with a little tremor, as if
was the most unkindest cut
your target's charms had overwhelmed you and made you emotional.
of all; \ For when the noble
Flattery can be a kind of verbal foreplay. Aphrodite's powers of seduc- Caesar saw him stab, \
Ingratitude, more strong
tion, which were said to come from the magnificent girdle she wore, in-
than traitors' arms, \ Quite
volved a sweetness of language—a skill with the soft, flattering words that
vanquished him. . . . \ O,
prepare the way for erotic thoughts. Insecurities and nagging self-doubts now you weep, and I
have a dampening effect on the libido. Make your targets feel secure and al- perceive you feel \ The dint
of pity. These are gracious
luring through your flattering words and their resistance will melt away.

[PAGE 288]
260 • The Art of Seduction
drops. \ Kind souls, what Sometimes the most pleasant thing to hear is the promise of something
weep you when you but wonderful, a vague but rosy future that is just around the corner. President
behold \ Our Caesar's
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in his public speeches, talked little about spe-
vesture wounded? Look
cific programs for dealing with the Depression; instead he used rousing
you here! \ Here is himself,
marred as you see until rhetoric to paint a picture of America's glorious future. In the various leg-
traitors. ends of Don Juan, the great seducer would immediately focus women's at-
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, tention on the future, a fantastic world to which he promised to whisk
JULIUS CAESAR them off. Tailor your sweet words to your targets' particular problems and
fantasies. Promise something realizable, something possible, but do not
make it too specific; you are inviting them to dream. If they are mired in
dull routine, talk of adventure, preferably with you. Do not discuss how it
will be accomplished; speak as if it magically already existed, somewhere in
the future. Lift people's thoughts into the clouds and they will relax, their
defenses will come down, and it will be that much easier to maneuver and
lead them astray. Your words become a kind of elevating drug.
The most anti-seductive form of language is argument. How many
silent enemies do we create by arguing? There is a superior way to get peo-
ple to listen and be persuaded: humor and a light touch. The nineteenth-
century English politician Benjamin Disraeli was a master at this game. In
Parliament, to fail to reply to an accusation or slanderous comment was a
deadly mistake: silence meant the accuser was right. Yet to respond angrily,
to get into an argument, was to look ugly and defensive. Disraeli used a dif-
ferent tactic: he stayed calm. When the time came to reply to an attack, he
would slowly make his way to the speaker's table, pause, then utter a hu-
morous or sarcastic retort. Everyone would laugh. Now that he had
warmed people up, he would proceed to refute his enemy, still mixing in
amusing comments; or perhaps he would simply move on to another sub-
ject, as if he were above it all. His humor took out the sting of any attack
on him. Laughter and applause have a domino effect: once your listeners
have laughed, they are more likely to laugh again. In this lighthearted mood
they are also more apt to listen. A subtle touch and a bit of irony give you
room to persuade them, move them to your side, mock your enemies. That
is the seductive form of argument.
Shortly after the murder of Julius Caesar, the head of the band of con-
spirators who had killed him, Brutus, addressed an angry mob. He tried to
reason with the crowd, explaining that he had wanted to save the Roman
Republic from dictatorship. The people were momentarily convinced—
yes, Brutus seemed a decent man. Then Mark Antony took the stage, and
he in turn delivered a eulogy for Caesar. He seemed overwhelmed with
emotion. He talked of his love for Caesar, and of Caesar's love for the
Roman people. He mentioned Caesar's will; the crowd clamored to hear it,
but Antony said no, for if he read it they would know how deeply Caesar
had loved them, and how dastardly this murder was. The crowd again in-
sisted he read the will; instead he held up Caesar's bloodstained cloak, not-
ing its rents and tears. This was where Brutus had stabbed the great general,
he said; Cassius had stabbed him here. Then finally he read the will, which

[PAGE 289]
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 261
told how much wealth Caesar had left to the Roman people. This was the
coup de grace—the crowd turned against the conspirators and went off to
lynch them.
Antony was a clever man, who knew how to stir a crowd. According to
the Greek historian Plutarch, "When he saw that his oratory had cast a spell
over the people and that they were deeply stirred by his words, he began to
introduce into his praises [of Caesar] a note of pity and of indignation at
Caesar's fate." Seductive language aims at people's emotions, for emotional
people are easier to deceive. Antony used various devices to stir the crowd:
a tremor in his voice, a distraught and then an angry tone. An emotional
voice has an immediate, contagious effect on the listener. Antony also
teased the crowd with the will, holding off the reading of it to the end,
knowing it would push people over the edge. Holding up the cloak, he
made his imagery visceral.
Perhaps you are not trying to whip a crowd into a frenzy; you just want
to bring people over to your side. Choose your strategy and words carefully.
You might think it is better to reason with people, explain your ideas. But
it is hard for an audience to decide whether an argument is reasonable as
they listen to you talk. They have to concentrate and listen closely, which
requires great effort. People are easily distracted by other stimuli, and if
they miss a part of your argument, they will feel confused, intellectually in-
ferior, and vaguely insecure. It is more persuasive to appeal to people's
hearts than their heads. Everyone shares emotions, and no one feels inferior
to a speaker who stirs up their feelings. The crowd bonds together, every-
one contagiously experiencing the same emotions. Antony talked of Cae-
sar as if he and the listeners were experiencing the murder from Caesar's
point of view. What could be more provocative? Use such changes of per-
spective to make your listeners feel what you are saying. Orchestrate your
effects. It is more effective to move from one emotion to another than to
just hit one note. The contrast between Antony's affection for Caesar and
his indignation at the murderers was much more powerful than if he had
stayed with one feeling or the other.
The emotions you are trying to arouse should be strong ones. Do not
speak of friendship and disagreement; speak of love and hate. And it is cru-
cial to try to feel something of the emotions you are trying to elicit. You
will be more believable that way. This should not be difficult: imagine the
reasons for loving or hating before you speak. If necessary, think of some-
thing from your past that fills you with rage. Emotions are contagious; it is
easier to make someone cry if you are crying yourself. Make your voice an
instrument, and train it to communicate emotion. Learn to seem sincere.
Napoleon studied the greatest actors of his time, and when he was alone he
would practice putting emotion into his voice.
The goal of seductive speech is often to create a kind of hypnosis: you
are distracting people, lowering their defenses, making them more vulnera-
ble to suggestion. Learn the hypnotist's lessons of repetition and affirma-
tion, key elements in putting a subject to sleep. Repetition involves using

[PAGE 290]
262 • The Art of Seduction
the same words over and over, preferably a word with emotional content:
"taxes," "liberals," "bigots." The effect is mesmerizing—ideas can be per-
manently implanted in people's unconscious simply by being repeated often
enough. Affirmation is simply the making of strong positive statements,
like the hypnotist's commands. Seductive language should have a kind of
boldness, which will cover up a multitude of sins. Your audience will be so
caught up in your bold language that they won't have time to reflect on
whether or not it is true. Never say "I don't think the other side made a
wise decision"; say "We deserve better," or "They have made a mess of
things." Affirmative language is active language, full of verbs, imperatives,
and short sentences. Cut out "I believe," "Perhaps," "In my opinion." Head
straight for the heart.
You are learning to speak a different kind of language. Most people
employ symbolic language—their words stand for something real, the feel-
ings, ideas, and beliefs they really have. Or they stand for concrete things in
the real world. (The origin of the word "symbolic" lies in a Greek word
meaning "to bring things together"—in this case, a word and something
real.) As a seducer you are using the opposite: diabolic language. Your words
do not stand for anything real; their sound, and the feelings they evoke, are
more important than what they are supposed to stand for. (The word "dia-
bolic" ultimately means to separate, to throw things apart—here, words and
reality.) The more you make people focus on your sweet-sounding lan-
guage, and on the illusions and fantasies it conjures, the more you diminish
their contact with reality. You lead them into the clouds, where it is hard to
distinguish truth from untruth, real from unreal. Keep your words vague
and ambiguous, so people are never quite sure what you mean. Envelop
them in demonic, diabolical language and they will not be able to focus on
your maneuvers, on the possible consequences of your seduction. And the
more they lose themselves in illusion, the easier it will be to lead them
astray and seduce them.
Symbol: The Clouds. In the clouds it is hard to see
the exact forms of things. Everything seems vague;
the imagination runs wild, seeing things that are
not there. Your words must lift people into
the clouds, where it is easy for them
to lose their way.

[PAGE 291]
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 263
Reversal
Do not confuse flowery language with seduction: in using flowery lan-
guage you run the risk of wearing on people's nerves, of seeming
pretentious. Excess verbiage is a sign of selfishness, of your inability to rein
in your natural tendencies. Often with language, less is more; the elusive,
vague, ambiguous phrase leaves the listener more room for imagination
than does a sentence full of bombast and self-indulgence.
You must always think first of your targets, and of what will be pleasant
to their ears. There will be many times when silence is best. What you do
not say can be suggestive and eloquent, making you seem mysterious. In
the eleventh-century Japanese court diary The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon,
the counselor Yoshichika is intrigued by a lady he sees in a carriage, silent
and beautiful. He sends her a note, and she sends one back; he is the only
one to read it, but by his reaction everyone can tell it is in bad taste, or
badly written. It spoils the effect of her beauty. Shonagon writes, "I have
heard people suggest that no reply at all is better than a bad one." If you are
not eloquent, if you cannot master seductive language, at least learn to curb
your tongue—use silence to cultivate an enigmatic presence.
Finally, seduction has a pace and rhythm. In phase one, you are cautious
and indirect. It is often best to disguise your intentions, to put your target at
ease with deliberately neutral words. Your conversation should be harmless,
even a bit bland. In this second phase, you turn more to the attack; this is
the time for seductive language. Now when you envelop them in your se-
ductive words and letters, it comes as a pleasant surprise. It gives them the
immensely pleasing feeling that they are the ones to suddenly inspire you
with such poetry and intoxicating words.

[PAGE 292]


[PAGE 293]
Pay Attention to Detail
Lofty
words and grand
gestures can be suspi-
cious: why are you trying
so hard to please? The details
of a seduction—the subtle ges-
tures, the offhand things you do—
are often more charming and
revealing. You must learn to distract
your victims with a myriad of pleasant
little rituals—thoughtful gifts tailored
just for them, clothes and adornments
designed to please them, gestures that
show the time and attention you are
paying them. All of their senses are
engaged in the details you orchestrate.
Create spectacles to dazzle their
eyes; mesmerized by what they
see, they will not notice what
you are really up to. Learn to
suggest the proper feelings
and moods through
details.

[PAGE 294]


[PAGE 295]
The Mesmerizing Effect
In December 1898, the wives of the seven major Western ambassadors to
China received a strange invitation: the sixty-three-year-old Empress
Dowager Tzu Hsi was hosting a banquet in their honor in the Forbidden
City in Beijing. The ambassadors themselves had been quite displeased
with the empress dowager, for several reasons. She was a Manchu, a race of
northerners who had conquered China in the early seventeenth century,
The barge she sat in, like a
establishing the Ching Dynasty and ruling the country for nearly three burnish'd throne, \Burn'd
hundred years. By the 1890s, the Western powers had begun to carve up on the water: the poop was
beaten gold; \ Purple the
parts of China, a country they considered backward. They wanted China
sails, and so perfumed that
to modernize, but the Manchus were conservative, and resisted all reform. \ The winds were love-sick
Earlier in 1898, the Chinese Emperor Kuang Hsu, the empress dowager's with them; the oars were
silver, \ Which to the tune
twenty-seven-year-old nephew, had actually begun a series of reforms,
of flutes kept stroke, and
with the blessings of the West. Then, one hundred days into this period of made \ The water which
reform, word reached the Western diplomats from the Forbidden City that they beat to follow faster, \
As amorous of their
the emperor was quite ill, and that the empress dowager had taken power.
strokes. For her own
They suspected foul play; the empress had probably acted to stop the re-
person, \ It beggar'd all
forms. The emperor was being mistreated, probably poisoned— description: she did lie \ In
perhaps he was already dead. When the seven ambassadors' wives were her pavilion—cloth-of-gold
of tissue— \ O'er picturing
preparing for their unusual visit, their husbands warned them: Do not trust
that Venus where we see \
the empress dowager. A wily woman with a cruel streak, she had risen from The fancy outwork nature:
obscurity to become the concubine of a previous emperor and had man- on each side her \ Stood
pretty dimpled boys, like
aged over the years to accumulate great power. Far more than the emperor,
smiling Cupids, \ With
she was the most feared person in China. divers-colour'd fans, whose
On the appointed day, the women were borne into the Forbidden City wind did seem \ To glow
the delicate cheeks which
in a procession of sedan chairs carried by court eunuchs in dazzling uni-
they did cool, \ And
forms. The women themselves, not to be outdone, wore the latest Western what they undid did. . . . \
fashions—tight corsets, long velvet dresses with leg-of-mutton sleeves, bil- Her gentlewomen, like the
Nereids, \ So many
lowing petticoats, tall plumed hats. The residents of the Forbidden City
mermaids, tended her i' the
looked at their clothes in amazement, and particularly at the way their eyes, \ And made their
dresses displayed their prominent bosoms. The wives felt sure they had im- bends adornings: at the
pressed their hosts. At the Audience Hall they were greeted by princes and helm \ A seeming mermaid
steers: the silken tackle \
princesses, as well as lower royalty. The Chinese women were wearing
Swell with the touches of
magnificent Manchu costumes with the traditional high, jewel-encrusted those flower-soft hands \
black headdresses; they were arranged in a hierarchical order reflected in That yarely frame the
office. From the barge \ A
the color of their dresses, an astounding rainbow of color.
strange invisible perfume
The wives were served tea in the most delicate porcelain cups, then hits the sense \ Of the
267

[PAGE 296]
268 • The Art of Seduction
adjacent wharfs. The city were escorted into the presence of the empress dowager. The sight took
cast \ Her people out upon their breath away. The empress was seated on the Dragon Throne, which
her; and Antony, \
was studded with jewels. She wore heavily brocaded robes, a magnificent
Enthron'd i' the market-
place, did sit alone, \ headdress bearing diamonds, pearls, and jade, and an enormous necklace of
Whistling to the air; perfectly matched pearls. She was a tiny woman, but on the throne, in that
which, but for vacancy, \
dress, she seemed a giant. She smiled at the ladies with much warmth and
Had gone to gaze on
Cleopatra too \ And made sincerity. To their relief, seated below her on a smaller throne was her
a gap in nature. nephew the emperor. He looked pale, but he greeted them enthusiastically
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, and seemed in good spirits. Maybe he was indeed simply ill.
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA The empress shook the hand of each of the women. As she did so, an
attendant eunuch handed her a large gold ring set with a large pearl, which
she slipped onto each woman's hand. After this introduction, the wives
In the palmy days of the were escorted into another room, where they again took tea, and then were
gay quarters at Edo there
led into a banqueting hall, where the empress now sat on a chair of yellow
was a connoisseur of
fashion named Sakakura satin—yellow being the imperial color. She spoke to them for a while; she
who grew intimate with the had a beautiful voice. (It was said that her voice could literally charm birds
great courtesan Chitose.
out of trees.) At the end of the conversation, she took the hand of each
This woman was much
woman again, and with much emotion, told them, "One family—all one
given to drinking sake; as
a side dish she relished the family." The women then saw a performance in the imperial theater. Fi-
so-called flower crabs, to be nally the empress received them one last time. She apologized for the per-
found in the Mogami
formance they had just seen, which was certainly inferior to what they
River in the East, and
these she had pickled in were used to in the West. There was one more round of tea, and this time,
salt for her enjoyment. as the wife of the American ambassador reported it, the empress "stepped
Knowing this, Sakakura
forward and tipped each cup of tea to her own lips and took a sip, then
commissioned a painter of
the Kano School to execute lifted the cup on the other side, to our lips, and said again, 'One family—all
her bamboo crest in one family' " The women were given more gifts, then were escorted back
powdered gold on the tiny
to their sedan chairs and borne out of the Forbidden City.
shells of these crabs; he
The women relayed to their husbands their earnest belief that they had
fixed the price of each
painted shell at one all been wrong about the empress. The American ambassador's wife re-
rectangular piece of gold, ported, "She was bright and happy and her face glowed with good will.
and presented them to
There was no trace of cruelty to be seen. . . . Her actions were full of free-
Chitose throughout the
year, so that she never dom and warmth. . . . [We left] full of admiration for her majesty and
lacked for them. hopes for China." The husbands reported back to their governments: the
—IHARA SAIKAKU, THE LIFE OF emperor was fine, and the empress could be trusted.
AN AMOROUS WOMAN, AND
OTHER WRITINGS, TRANSLATED
BY IVAN MORRIS
Interpretation. The foreign contingent in China had no idea what was
really happening in the Forbidden City. In truth, the emperor had con-
spired to arrest and possibly murder his aunt. Discovering the plot, a terri-
For such men as have
practised love, have ever ble crime in Confucian terms, she forced him to sign his own abdication,
held this a sound maxim had him confined, and told the outside world that he was ill. As part of his
that there is naught to be
punishment, he was to appear at state functions and act as if nothing had
compared with a woman in
her clothes. Again when happened.
you reflect how a man doth The empress dowager loathed Westerners, whom she considered bar-
brave, rumple, squeeze and
barians. She disliked the ambassadors' wives, with their ugly fashions and
make light of his lady's
finery, and how he doth simpering ways. The banquet was a show, a seduction, to appease the West-

[PAGE 297]
Pay Attention to Detail • 269
ern powers, which had been threatening invasion if the emperor had been work ruin and loss to the
killed. The goal of the seduction was simple: dazzle the wives with color, grand cloth of gold and web
of silver, to tinsel
spectacle, theater. The empress applied all her expertise to the task, and she
and silken stuffs, pearls and
was a genius for detail. She had designed the spectacles in a rising order—
precious stones, 'tis plain
the uniformed eunuchs first, then the Manchu ladies in their headdresses, how his ardour and
and finally the empress herself. It was pure theater, and it was overwhelm- satisfaction be increased
manifold—far more than
ing. Then the empress brought the spectacle down a notch, humanizing it
with some simple
with gifts, warm greetings, the reassuring presence of the emperor, teas, shepherdess or other woman
and entertainments, which were in no way inferior to anything in the West. of like quality, be she as
fair as she may. • And why
She ended the banquet on another high note—the little drama with the
of yore was Venus found so
sharing of the teacups, followed by even more magnificent gifts. The fair and so desirable, if not
women's heads were spinning when they left. In truth they had never seen that with all her beauty she
was always gracefully
such exotic splendor—and they never understood how carefully its details
attired likewise, and
had been orchestrated by the empress. Charmed by the spectacle, they trans- generally scented, that she
ferred their happy feelings to the empress and gave her their approval—all did ever smell sweet an
that she required. hundred paces away? For it
hath ever been held of all
The key to distracting people (seduction is distraction) is to fill their
how that perfumes be a
eyes and ears with details, little rituals, colorful objects. Detail is what great incitement to love. •
makes things seem real and substantial. A thoughtful gift won't seem to This is the reason why the
Empresses and great dames
have an ulterior motive. A ritual full of charming little actions is so enjoy-
of Rome did make much
able to watch. Jewelry, handsome furnishings, touches of color in clothing, usage of these perfumes, as
dazzle the eye. It is a childish weakness of ours: we prefer to focus on the do likewise our great ladies
of France—and above all
pleasant little details rather than on the larger picture. The more senses you
those of Spain and Italy,
appeal to, the more mesmerizing the effect. The objects you use in your se- which from the oldest times
duction (gifts, clothes, etc.) speak their own language, and it is a powerful have been more curious and
more exquisite in luxury
one. Never ignore a detail or leave one to chance. Orchestrate them into a
than Frenchwomen, as well
spectacle and no one will notice how manipulative you are being. in perfumes as in costumes
and magnificent attire,
whereof the fair ones of
France have since borrowed
The Sensuous Effect
the patterns and copied the
dainty workmanship.
One day a messenger told Prince Genji—the aging but still consum- Moreover the others, Italian
and Spanish, had learned
mate seducer in the Heian court of late-tenth-century Japan—that
the same from old models
one of his youthful conquests had suddenly died, leaving behind an or- and ancient statues of
phan, a young woman named Tamakazura. Genji was not Tamakazura s fa- Roman ladies, the which
are to be seen among
ther, but he decided to bring her to court and be her protector anyway.
sundry other antiquities yet
Soon after her arrival, men of the highest rank began to woo her. Genji extant in Spain and Italy;
had told everyone she was a lost daughter of his; as a result, they assumed the which, if any man will
regard them carefully, will
that she was beautiful, for Genji was the handsomest man in the court. (At
be found very perfect in
the time, men rarely saw a young girl's face before marriage; in theory, they mode of hair-dressing and
were allowed to talk to her only if she was on the other side of a screen.) fashion of robes, and very
Genji showered her with attention, helping her sort through all the love meet to incite love.
letters she was receiving and advising her on the right match. —SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
As Tamakazura's protector, Genji was able to see her face, and she was LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
indeed beautiful. He fell in love with her. What a shame, he thought, to ALLINSON
give this lovely creature away to another man. One night, overwhelmed by

[PAGE 298]
270 • The Art of Seduction
For years after her entry her charms, he held her hand and told her how much she resembled her
into the palace, a large mother, whom he once had loved. She trembled—not with excitement,
number of court-maidens
however, but with fear, for although he was not her father, he was supposed
were especially set aside for
to be her protector, not a suitor. Her attendants were away and it was a
preparing Kuei-fei 's
dresses, which were chosen beautiful night. Genji silently threw off his perfumed robe and pulled her
and fashioned according to down beside him. She began to cry, and to resist. Always a gentleman,
the flowers of the season.
Genji told her that he would respect her wishes, he would always care for
For instance, for New Year
(spring) she had blossoms her, and she had nothing to fear. He then politely excused himself.
of apricot, plum and Several days later Genji was helping Tamakazura with her correspon-
narcissus; for summer, she
dence when he read a love letter from his younger brother, Prince Hotaru,
adopted the lotus; for
autumn, she patterned who numbered among her suitors. In the letter, Hotaru berated Tama-
them after the peony; for kazura for not letting him get physically close enough to talk to her and tell
winter, she employed the
her his feelings. Tamakazura had not replied; unused to the manners of the
chrysanthemum. Of
court, she had felt shy and intimidated. As if to help her, Genji got one of
jewelry she was fondest of
pearls, and the finest his servants to write to Hotaru in her name. The letter, written on beauti-
products of the world found ful perfumed paper, warmly invited the prince to visit her.
their way into her boudoir
Hotaru appeared at the appointed hour. He smelled a beguiling in-
and were frequently
embroidered on her cense, mysterious and seductive. (Mixed into this scent was Genji's own
numerous dresses. • Kuei- perfume.) The prince felt a wave of excitement. Approaching the screen
fei was the embodiment of
behind which Tamakazura sat, he confessed his love for her. Without mak-
all that was lovely and
extravagant. No wonder ing a sound, she retreated to another screen, farther away. Suddenly there
that no king, prince, was a flash of light, as if a torch had flared up, and Hotaru saw her profile
courtier or humble
behind the screen: she was more beautiful than he had imagined. Two
attendant who ever met her
could resist the allurement things delighted the prince: the sudden, mysterious flash of light, and the
of her charms. Besides, she brief glimpse of his beloved. Now he was truly in love.
was the most artful of
Hotaru began to court her assiduously. Meanwhile, feeling reassured that
women and knew how to
Genji was no longer chasing her, Tamakazura saw her protector more often.
use her natural gifts to the
best purpose. . . . The And now she could not help noticing little details: Genji's robes seemed to
Emperor Ming Huang, glow, in pleasing and vibrant colors, as if dyed by unworldly hands. Hotaru's
supreme in the land and
robes seemed drab by comparison. And the perfumes burned into Genji's
with thousands of the most
handsome maidens to garments, how intoxicating they were. No one else bore such a scent. Ho-
choose from, became a taru's letters were polite and well written, but the letters Genji sent her were
complete slave to her
on magnificent paper, perfumed and dyed, and they quoted lines of poetry,
magnetic powers . . .
spending day and night in always surprising yet always appropriate for the occasion. Genji also grew
her company and giving up and gathered flowers—wild carnations, for instance—that he gave as gifts
his whole kingdom
and that seemed to symbolize his unique charm.
for her sake.
One evening Genji proposed to teach Tamakazura how to play the
—SHU-CHIUNG, YANG KUEI-
koto. She was delighted. She loved to read romance novels, and whenever
FEI: THE MOST FAMOUS
BEAUTY OF CHINA Genji played the koto, she felt as if she were transported into one of her
books. No one played the instrument better than Genji; she would be hon-
ored to learn from him. Now he saw her often, and the method of his
lessons was simple: she would choose a song for him to play, and then
Then [Pao-yu] called
Bright Design to him and would try to imitate him. After they played, they would lie down side by
said to her, "Go and see side, their heads resting on the koto, staring up at the moon. Genji would
what [Black Jade] is doing.
have torches set up in the garden, giving the view the softest glow.
If she asks about me, just
say that I am quite all The more Tamakazura saw of the court—of Prince Hotaru, the other

[PAGE 299]
Pay Attention to Detail • 271
suitors, the emperor himself—the more she realized that none could com- right now. " • "You'll have
pare to Genji. He was supposed to be her protector, yes, that was still true, to think of a better excuse
than that," Bright Design
but was it such a sin to fall in love with him? Confused, she found herself
said. "Isn't there anything
giving in to the caresses and kisses that he began to surprise her with, now
that you can send or want
that she was too weak to resist. to borrow? I don't want to
go there and feel like a fool
without anything to say. " •
Pao-yu thought for a
Interpretation. Genji is the protagonist in the eleventh-century novel The moment and then took two
Tale of Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court. handkerchiefs from under
his pillow and gave them
The character was most likely inspired by the real-life seducer Fujiwara no
to the maid, saying, "Well
Korechika. then, tell her that I sent
In his seduction of Tamakazura, Genji's strategy was simple: he would you with these," • "What
a strange present to send"
make her realize indirectly how charming and irresistible he was by sur-
the maid smiled. "What
rounding her with unspoken details. He also brought her in contact with
does she want two old
his brother; comparison with this drab, stiff figure would make Genji's su- handkerchiefs for? She will
periority clear. The night Hotaru first visited her, Genji set everything up, be angry again and say
that you are trying to make
as if to support Hotaru's seducing—the mysterious scent, then the flash of
fun of her." • "Don't
light by the screen. (The light came from a novel effect: earlier in the eve- worry" Pao-yu assured her.
ning, Genji had collected hundreds of fireflies in a cloth bag. At the proper "She will understand." •
Black Jade had already
moment he let them all go at once.) But when Tamakazura saw Genji en-
retired when Bright Design
couraging Hotaru's pursuit of her, her defenses against her protector re- arrived at the Bamboo
laxed, allowing her senses to be filled by this master of seductive effects. Retreat. "What brought
you at this hour?" Black
Genji orchestrated every possible detail—the scented paper, the colored
Jade asked. • "[Pao-yu]
robes, the lights in the garden, the wild carnations, the apt poetry, the koto asked me to bring these
lessons which induced an irresistible feeling of harmony. Tamakazura found handkerchiefs for [Black
Jade]." • For a moment
herself dragged into a sensual whirlpool. Bypassing the shyness and mistrust
Black Jade was at a loss to
that words or actions would only have worsened, Genji surrounded his
see why Pao-yu should
ward with objects, sights, sounds, and scents that symbolized the pleasure of send her such a present at
his company far more than his actual physical presence would have—in fact that particular moment.
She said, "I suppose they
his presence could only have been threatening. He knew that a young girl's
must be something unusual
senses are her most vulnerable point. that somebody gave him.
The key to Genji's masterful orchestration of detail was his attention to Tell him to keep them
himself or give them to
the target of his seduction. Like Genji, you must attune your own senses to
someone who will
your targets, watching them carefully, adapting to their moods. You sense appreciate them. I have no
when they are defensive and retreat. You also sense when they are giving in, need of them." • "They
are nothing unusual,"
and move forward. In between, the details you set up—gifts, entertain-
Bright Design said. "Just
ments, the clothes you wear, the flowers you choose—are aimed precisely two ordinary handkerchiefs
at their tastes and predilections. Genji knew he was dealing with a young that he happened to have
around. " Black Jade was
girl who loved romantic novels; his wild flowers, koto playing, and poetry
even more puzzled, and
brought their world to life for her. Attend to your targets' every move and
then it suddenly dawned
desire, and reveal your attentiveness in the details and objects you surround upon her: Pao-yu knew
them with, filling their senses with the mood you need to inspire. They can that she would weep for
him and so sent two
argue with your words, but not with the effect you have on their senses.
handkerchiefs of his own. •
"You can leave them,
then," she said to Bright
Design, who in turn was

[PAGE 300]
272 • The Art of Seduction
surprised that Black Jade Therefore in my view when the courtier wishes to declare
did not take offense at his love he should do so by his actions rather than by
what seemed to her a crude speech, for a man's feelings are sometimes more clearly re-
joke. • As Black Jade
vealed by . .. a gesture of respect or a certain shyness than
thought over the signif-
icance of the handkerchiefs by volumes of words.
she was happy and sad by
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE
turns: happy because Pao-
yu read her innermost
thoughts and sad because
she wondered if what was Keys to Seduction
uppermost in her thoughts
would ever be fulfilled.
Thinking thus to herself of When we were children, our senses were much more active. The col-
the future and of the past, ors of a new toy, or a spectacle such as a circus, held us in thrall; a
she could not fall asleep. smell or a sound could fascinate us. In the games we created, many of them
Despite Purple Cuckoo's
reproducing something in the adult world on a smaller scale, what pleasure
remonstrances, she had her
lamp relit and began to we took in orchestrating every detail. We noticed everything.
compose a series of As we grow older our senses get dulled. We no longer notice as much,
quatrains, writing them
for we are constantly hurrying to get things done, to move on to the next
directly on the
handkerchiefs which task. In seduction, you are always trying to bring the target back to the
Pao-yu had sent. golden moments of childhood. A child is less rational, more easily de-
—TSAO HSUEH CHIN, ceived. A child is also more attuned to the pleasures of the senses. So when
DREAM OF THE RED CHAMBER, your targets are with you, you must never give them the feeling they nor-
TRANSLATED BY CHI-CHEN
mally get in the real world, where we are all rushed, ruthless, out for our-
WANG
selves. You need to deliberately slow things down, and return them to the
simpler times of their youth. The details that you orchestrate—colors, gifts,
little ceremonies—are aimed at their senses, at the childish delight we take
in the immediate charms of the natural world. Their senses filled with de-
lightful things, they grow less capable of reason and rationality. Pay atten-
tion to detail and you will find yourself assuming a slower pace; your targets
will not focus on what you might be after (sexual favors, power, etc.) be-
cause you seem so considerate, so attentive. In the childish realm of the
senses in which you envelop them, they get a clear sense that you are in-
volving them in something distinct from the real world—an essential ingre-
dient of seduction. Remember: the more you get people to focus on the
little things, the less they will notice your larger direction. The seduction
will assume the slow, hypnotic pace of a ritual, in which the details have a
heightened importance and the moments are full of ceremony.
In eighth-century China, Emperor Ming Huang caught a glimpse of a
beautiful young woman, combing her hair beside an imperial pool. Her
name was Yang Kuei-fei, and even though she was the concubine of the
emperor's son, he had to have her for himself. Since he was emperor, no-
body could stop him. The emperor was a practical man—he had many
concubines, and they all had their charms, but he had never lost his head
over a woman. Yang Kuei-fei, though, was different. Her body exuded the
most wonderful fragrance. She wore gowns made of the sheerest silk gauze,
each embroidered with different flowers, depending on the season. In
walking she seemed to float, her tiny steps invisible beneath her gown. She

[PAGE 301]
Pay Attention to Detail • 273
danced to perfection, wrote songs in his honor that she sang magnificently,
had a way of looking at him that made his blood boil with desire. She
quickly became his favorite.
Yang Kuei-fei drove the emperor to distraction. He built palaces for her,
spent all his time with her, satisfied her every whim. Before long his king-
dom was bankrupt and ruined. Yang Kuei-fei was an artful seductress who
had a devastating effect on all of the men who crossed her path. There were
so many ways her presence charmed—the scents, the voice, the movements,
the witty conversation, the artful glances, the embroidered gowns. These
pleasurable details turned a mighty king into a distracted baby.
Since time immemorial, women have known that within the most ap-
parently self-possessed man is an animal whom they can lead by filling his
senses with the proper physical lures. The key is to attack on as many fronts
as possible. Do not ignore your voice, your gestures, your walk, your
clothes, your glances. Some of the most alluring women in history have so
distracted their victims with sensual detail that the men fail to notice it is all
an illusion.
From the 1940s on into the early 1960s, Pamela Churchill Harriman
had a series of affairs with some of the most prominent and wealthy men in
the world—Averill Harriman (whom years later she married), Gianni Agnelli
(heir to the Fiat fortune), Baron Elie de Rothschild. What attracted these
men, and kept them in thrall, was not her beauty or her lineage or her viva-
cious personality, but her extraordinary attention to detail. It began with
her attentive look as she listened to your every word, soaking up your
tastes. Once she found her way into your home, she would fill it with your
favorite flowers, get your chef to cook that dish you had tasted only in the
finest restaurants. You mentioned an artist you liked? A few days later that
artist would be attending one of your parties. She found the perfect an-
tiques for you, dressed in the way that most pleased or excited you, and she
did this without your saying a word—she spied, gathered information from
third parties, overheard you talking to someone else. Harriman's attention
to detail had an intoxicating effect on all the men in her life. It had some-
thing in common with the pampering of a mother, there to bring order
and comfort into their lives, attending to their needs. Life is harsh and
competitive. Attending to detail in a way that is soothing to the other per-
son makes them dependent upon you. The key is probing their needs in a
way that is not too obvious, so that when you make precisely the right ges-
ture, it seems uncanny, as if you had read their mind. This is another way of
returning your targets to childhood, when all of their needs were met.
In the eyes of women all over the world, Rudolph Valentino reigned
as the Great Lover through much of the 1920s. The qualities behind his
appeal certainly included his handsome, almost pretty face, his dancing
skills, the strangely exciting streak of cruelty in his manner. But his perhaps
most endearing trait was his time-consuming approach to courtship. His
films would show him seducing a woman slowly, with careful details—
sending her flowers (choosing the variety to match the mood he wanted to

[PAGE 302]
274 • The Art of Seduction
induce), taking her hand, lighting her cigarette, escorting her to romantic
places, leading her on the dance floor. These were silent movies, and his
audiences never got to hear him speak—it was all in his gestures. Men came
to hate him, for their wives and girlfriends now expected the slow, careful
Valentino treatment.
Valentino had a feminine streak; it was said that he wooed a woman the
way another woman would. But femininity need not figure in this ap-
proach to seduction. In the early 1770s, Prince Gregory Potemkin began
an affair with Empress Catherine the Great of Russia that was to last many
years. Potemkin was a manly man, and not at all handsome. But he man-
aged to win the empress's heart by the many little things he did, and con-
tinued to do long after the affair had begun. He spoiled her with wonderful
gifts, never tired of writing her long letters, arranged for all kinds of enter-
tainments for her, composed songs to her beauty. Yet he would appear be-
fore her barefoot, hair uncombed, clothes wrinkled. There was no kind of
fussiness in his attention, which, however, did make it clear he would go to
the ends of the earth for her. A woman's senses are more refined than a
man's; to a woman, Yang Kuei-fei's overt sensual appeal would seem too
hurried and direct. What that means, though, is that all the man really has
to do is take it slowly, making seduction a ritual full of all kinds of little
things he has to do for his target. If he takes his time, he will have her eat-
ing out of his hand.
Everything in seduction is a sign, and nothing more so than clothes. It
is not that you have to dress interestingly, elegantly, or provocatively, but
that you have to dress for your target—have to appeal to your target's tastes.
When Cleopatra was seducing Mark Antony, her dress was not brazenly
sexual; she dressed as a Greek goddess, knowing his weakness for such fan-
tasy figures. Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of King Louis XV, knew
the king's weakness, his chronic boredom; she constantly wore different
clothes, changing not only their color but their style, supplying the king
with a constant feast for his eyes. Pamela Harriman was subdued in the
fashions she wore, befitting her role as a high-society geisha and reflecting
the sober tastes of the men she seduced. Contrast works well here: at work
or at home, you might dress nonchalantly—Marilyn Monroe, for example,
wore jeans and a T-shirt at home—but when you are with the target you
wear something elaborate, as if you were putting on a costume. Your Cin-
derella transformation will stir excitement, and the feeling that you have
done something just for the person you are with. Whenever your attention
is individualized (you would not dress like that for anyone else), it is infi-
nitely more seductive.
In the 1870s, Queen Victoria found herself wooed by Benjamin Dis-
raeli, her own prime minister. Disraeli's words were flattering and his
manner insinuating; he also sent her flowers, valentines, gifts—but not just
any flowers or gifts, the kind that most men would send. The flowers were
primroses, symbols of their simple yet beautiful friendship. From then on,
whenever Victoria saw a primrose she thought of Disraeli. Or he would

[PAGE 303]
Pay Attention to Detail • 275
write on a valentine that he, "no longer in the sunset, but the twilight of
his existence, must encounter a life of anxiety and toil; but this, too, has its
romance, when he remembers that he labors for the most gracious of be-
ings!" Or he might send her a little box, with no inscription, but with a
heart transfixed by an arrow on one side and the word "Fideliter," or
"Faithfully," on the other. Victoria fell in love with Disraeli.
A gift has immense seductive power, but the object itself is less impor-
tant than the gesture, and the subtle thought or emotion that it communi-
cates. Perhaps the choice relates to something from the target's past, or
symbolizes something between you, or merely represents the lengths you
will go to to please. It was not the money Disraeli spent that impressed Vic-
toria, but the time he took to find the appropriate thing or make the ap-
propriate gesture. Expensive gifts have no sentiment attached; they may
temporarily excite their recipient but they are quickly forgotten, as a child
forgets a new toy. The object that reflects its giver's attentiveness has a lin-
gering sentimental power, which resurfaces every time its owner sees it.
In 1919, the Italian writer and war hero Gabriele D'Annunzio managed
to put together a band of followers and take over the town of Fiume, on
the Adriatic coast (now part of Slovenia). They established their own gov-
ernment there, which lasted for over a year. D'Annunzio initiated a series
of public spectacles that were to be immensely influential on politicians
elsewhere. He would address the public from a balcony overlooking the
town's main square, which would be full of colorful banners, flags, pagan
religious symbols, and, at night, torches. The speeches would be followed
by processions. Although D'Annunzio was not at all a Fascist, what he did
in Fiume crucially affected Benito Mussolini, who borrowed his Roman
salutes, his use of symbols, his mode of public address. Spectacles like these
have been used since then by governments everywhere, even democratic
ones. Their overall impression may be grand, but it is the orchestrated de-
tails that make them work—the number of senses they appeal to, the vari-
ety of emotions they stir. You are aiming to distract people, and nothing is
more distracting than a wealth of detail—fireworks, flags, music, uniforms,
marching soldiers, the feel of the crowd packed together. It becomes diffi-
cult to think straight, particularly if the symbols and details stir up patriotic
emotions.
Finally, words are important in seduction, and have a great deal of
power to confuse, distract, and boost the vanity of the target. But what is
most seductive in the long run is what you do not say, what you communi-
cate indirectly. Words come easily, and people distrust them. Anyone can
say the right words; and once they are said, nothing is binding, and they
may even be forgotten altogether. The gesture, the thoughtful gift, the little
details seem much more real and substantial. They are also much more
charming than lofty words about love, precisely because they speak for
themselves and let the seduced read into them more than is there. Never
tell someone what you are feeling; let them guess it in your looks and ges-
tures. That is the more convincing language.

[PAGE 304]
276 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Banquet. A
feast has been prepared in your honor. Everything has
been elaborately coordinated—the flowers, the decorations, the selec-
tion of guests, the dancers, the music, the five-course meal, the end-
lessly flowing wine. The Banquet loosens your tongue,
and also your inhibitions.
Reversal
There is no reversal. Details are essential to any successful seduction, and
cannot be ignored.

[PAGE 305]
Poeticize Your Presence
Important things happen when your targets
are alone: the slightest feeling of relief that
you are not there, and it is all over. Fa-
miliarity and overexposure will cause
this reaction. Remain elusive, then,
so that when you are away, they
will yearn to see you again, and
will associate you only with
pleasant thoughts. Occupy their
minds by alternating an excit-
ing presence with a cool dis-
tance, exuberant moments
followed by calculated absences.
Associate yourself with poetic
images and objects, so that when
they think of you, they begin to see
you through an idealized halo. The
more you figure in their minds, the
more they will envelop you in seductive
fantasies. Feed these fantasies by subtle
inconsistencies and changes in your behavior.

[PAGE 306]


[PAGE 307]
Poetic Presence/Absence
In 1943, the Argentine military overthrew the government. A popular
forty-eight-year old colonel, Juan Perón, was named secretary of labor
and social affairs. Perón was a widow who had a fondness for young girls; at
the time of his appointment he was involved with a teenager whom he in-
troduced to one and all as his daughter.
One evening in January of 1944, Perón was seated among the other
military leaders in a Buenos Aires stadium, attending an artists' festival. It He who does not know
how to encircle a girl so
was late and there were some empty seats around him; out of nowhere two
that she loses sight of
beautiful young actresses asked his permission to sit down. Were they jok-
everything he does not
ing? He would be delighted. He recognized one of the actresses—it was want her to see, he who
Eva Duarte, a star of radio soap operas whose photograph was often on the does not know how to
poetize himself into a girl
covers of the tabloids. The other actress was younger and prettier, but
so that it is from her that
Perón could not take his eyes off Eva, who was talking to another colonel. everything proceeds as he
She was really not his type at all. She was twenty-four, far too old for hiswants it—he is and
remains a bungler. . . .
taste; she was dressed rather garishly; and there was something a little icy in
To poetize oneself into a
her manner. But she looked at him occasionally, and her glance excited girl is an art.
him. He looked away for a moment, and the next thing he knew she had
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
changed seats and was sitting next to him. They started to talk. She hung THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
on his every word. Yes, everything he said was precisely how she felt—the TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG; AND EDNA H. HONG;
poor, the workers, they were the future of Argentina. She had known
poverty herself. There were almost tears in her eyes when she said, at the
end of the conversation, "Thank you for existing."
What else? If she's out,
In the next few days, Eva managed to get rid of Perón's "daughter" and reclining in her litter, \
establish herself in his apartment. Everywhere he turned, there she was, Make your approach
fixing him meals, caring for him when he was ill, advising him on politics. discreet, \ And—just to fox
the sharp ears of those
Why did he let her stay? Usually he would have a fling with a superficial
around you— \ Cleverly
young girl, then get rid of her when she seemed to be sticking around too riddle each phrase \ With
much. But there was nothing superficial about Eva. As time went by he ambiguous subtleties. If
she's taking a leisurely \
found himself getting addicted to the feeling she gave him. She was in-
Stroll down the colonnade,
tensely loyal, mirroring his every idea, puffing him up endlessly. He felt then you stroll there too—
more masculine in her presence, that was it, and more powerful—she be- \ Vary your pace to hers,
march ahead, drop behind
lieved he would make the country's ideal leader, and her belief affected
her, \ Dawdling and brisk
him. She was like the women in the tango ballads he loved so much—the by turns. Be bold, \ Dodge
suffering women of the streets who became saintly mother figures and in round the columns
between you, brush your
looked after their men. Perón saw her every day, but he never felt he fully
person \ Lingeringly past
knew her; one day her comments were a little obscene, the next she was
hers. You must never fail \
279

[PAGE 308]
280 • The Art of Seduction
To attend the theater when the perfect lady. He had one worry: she was angling to get married, and he
she does, gaze at her could never marry her—she was an actress with a dubious past. The other
beauty— \ From the
colonels were already scandalized by his involvement with her. Neverthe-
shoulders up she's time \
Most delectably spent, a less, the affair went on.
feast for adoring glances, \ In 1945, Perón was dismissed from his post and jailed. The colonels
For the eloquence of
feared his growing popularity and distrusted the power of his mistress, who
eyebrows, the speaking
seemed to have total influence over him. It was the first time in almost two
sign. \ Applaud when some
male dancer struts on as years that he was truly alone, and truly separated from Eva. Suddenly he felt
the heroine, \ Cheer for new emotions sweeping over him: he pinned her photographs all over the
each lover's role. \ When
wall. Outside, massive strikes were being organized to protest his imprison-
she leaves, leave too—but
sit there as long as she ment, but all he could think about was Eva. She was a saint, a woman of
does: \ Waste time at your destiny, a heroine. He wrote to her, "It is only being apart from loved ones
mistress's whim. . . . \ Get
that we can measure our affection. From the day I left you ... I have not
her accustomed to you; \
Habit's the key, spare no been able to calm my sad heart. . . . My immense solitude is full of your
pains till that's achieved. \ memory." Now he promised to marry her.
Let her always see you
The strikes grew in intensity. After eight days, Perón was released from
around, always hear you
prison; he promptly married Eva. A few months later he was elected presi-
talking, \ Show her your
face night and day. \ When dent. As first lady, Eva attended state functions in her somewhat gaudy
you're confident you'll be dresses and jewelry; she was seen as a former actress with a large wardrobe.
missed, when your absence
Then, in 1947, she left for a tour of Europe, and Argentines followed her
\ Seems sure to cause her
regret, \ Then give her every move—the ecstatic crowds that greeted her in Spain, her audience
some respite: a field with the pope—and in her absence their opinion of her changed. How
improves when fallow, \
well she represented the Argentine spirit, its noble simplicity, its flair for
Parched soil soaks up the
rain. \ Demophoön's drama. When she returned a few weeks later, they overwhelmed her with
presence gave Phyllis no attention.
more than mild excitement;
Eva too had changed during her trip to Europe: now her dyed blond
\ It was his sailing caused
hair was pulled into a severe chignon, and she wore tailored suits. It was a
arson in her heart. \
Penelope was racked by serious look, befitting a woman who was to become the savior of the poor.
crafty Ulysses's absence, \ Soon her image could be seen everywhere—her initials on the walls, the
Protesilaus, abroad, made
sheets, the towels of the hospitals for the poor; her profile on the jerseys of
Laodameia burn. \ Short
partings do best, though: a soccer team from the poorest part of Argentina, whose club she spon-
time wears out affections, \ sored; her giant smiling face covering the sides of buildings. Since finding
The absent love fades, a
out anything personal about her had become impossible, all kinds of elabo-
new one takes its place. \
With Menelaus away, rate fantasies began to spring up about her. And when cancer cut her life
Helen's disinclination for short, in 1952, at the age of thirty-three (the age of Christ when he died),
sleeping \ Alone led her
the country went into mourning. Millions filed past her embalmed body.
into her guest's \ Warm bed
at night. Were you crazy, She was no longer a radio actress, a wife, a first lady, but Evita, a saint.
Menelaus?
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN Interpretation. Eva Duarte was an illegitimate child who had grown up in
poverty, escaped to Buenos Aires to become an actress, and been forced to
do many tawdry things to survive and get ahead in the theater world. Her
Concerning the Birth of dream was to escape all of the constraints on her future, for she was in-
Love • Here is what tensely ambitious. Perón was the perfect victim. He imagined himself a
happens in the soul: •
great leader, but the reality was that he was fast becoming a lecherous old
1. Admiration. • 2. You
man who was too weak to raise himself up. Eva injected poetry into his
think, "Mow delightful it

[PAGE 309]
Poeticize Your Presence • 281
life. Her language was florid and theatrical; she surrounded him with atten- would be to kiss her, to
tion, indeed to the point of suffocation, but a woman's dutiful service to a be kissed by her," and so
on. . . . • 3. Hope. You
great man was a classic image, and was celebrated in innumerable tango bal-
observe her perfections, and
lads. Yet she managed to remain elusive, mysterious, like a movie star you it is at this moment that a
see all the time on the screen but never really know. And when Perón was woman really ought to
surrender, for the utmost
finally alone, in prison, these poetic images and associations burst forth in
physical pleasure. Even the
his mind. He idealized her madly; as far as he was concerned, she was no most reserved women blush
longer an actress with a tawdry past. She seduced an entire nation the same to the whites of their eyes
way. The secret was her dramatic poetic presence, combined with a touch at this moment of hope.
The passion is so strong,
of elusive distance; over time, you would see whatever you wanted to in
and the pleasure so sharp,
her. To this day people fantasize about what Eva was really like. that they betray themselves
Familiarity destroys seduction. This rarely happens early on; there is so unmistakably. • 4. Love is
born. To love is to enjoy
much to learn about a new person. But a midpoint may arrive when the
seeing, touching, and
target has begun to idealize and fantasize about you, only to discover that sensing with all the senses,
you are not what he or she thought. It is not a question of being seen too as closely as possible, a
lovable object which loves
often, of being too available, as some imagine. In fact, if your targets see
in return. • 5. The first
you too rarely, you give them nothing to feed on, and their attention may crystallization begins. If
be caught by someone else; you have to occupy their mind. It is more a you are sure that a woman
loves you, it is a pleasure
matter of being too consistent, too obvious, too human and real. Your tar-
to endow her with a
gets cannot idealize you if they know too much about you, if they start to
thousand perfections and to
see you as all too human. Not only must you maintain a degree of distance, count your blessings with
but there must be something fantastical and bewitching about you, sparking infinite satisfaction. In the
end you overrate wildly,
all kinds of delightful possibilities in their mind. The possibility Eva held
and regard her as
out was the possibility that she was what in Argentine culture was consid- something fallen from
ered the ideal woman—devoted, motherly, saintly—but there are any num- Heaven, unknown as yet,
but certain to be yours. •
ber of poetic ideals you can try to embody. Chivalry, adventure, romance,
Leave a lover with his
and so on, are just as potent, and if you have a whiff of them about you, thoughts for twenty four
you can breathe enough poetry into the air to fill people's minds with fan- hours, and this is what will
happen: • At the salt
tasies and dreams. At all costs, you must embody something, even if it is
mines of Salzburg, they
roguery and evil. Anything to avoid the taint of familiarity and commonness.
throw a leafless wintry
bough into one of the
What I need is a woman who is something, anything; ei- abandoned workings. Two
or three months later they
ther very beautiful or very kind or in the last resort very
haul it out covered with a
wicked; very witty or very stupid, but something. shining deposit of crystals.
The smallest twig, no
—ALFRED DE MUSSET
bigger than a torn-tit's claw,
is studded with a galaxy of
scintillating diamonds. The
Keys to Seduction original branch is no longer
recognizable. • What I
have called crystallization
We all have a self-image that is more flattering than the truth: we is a mental process which
think of ourselves as more generous, selfless, honest, kindly, intelli- draws from everything that
happens new proofs of the
gent, or good-looking than in fact we are. It is extremely difficult for us to
perfection of the loved
be honest with ourselves about our own limitations; we have a desperate
one. . . . • A man in love
need to idealize ourselves. As the writer Angela Carter remarks, we would sees every perfection in the
rather align ourselves with angels than with the higher primates from object of his love, but his
attention is liable to
which we are actually descended.

[PAGE 310]
282 • The Art of Seduction
wander after a time because This need to idealize extends to our romantic entanglements, because
one gets tired of anything when we fall in love, or under the spell of another person, we see a reflec-
uniform, even perfect
tion of ourselves. The choice we make in deciding to become involved
happiness. • This is what
with another person reveals something important and intimate about us: we
happens next to fix the
attention: • 6. Doubt resist seeing ourselves as having fallen for someone who is cheap or tacky or
creeps in. . . . He is met tasteless, because it reflects badly on who we are. Furthermore, we are often
with indifference, coldness,
likely to fall for someone who resembles us in some way. Should that per-
or even anger if he appears
too confident. . . . The son be deficient, or worst of all ordinary, then there is something deficient
lover begins to be less sure and ordinary about us. No, at all costs the loved one must be overvalued
of the good fortune he was
and idealized, at least for the sake of our own self-esteem. Besides, in a
anticipating and subjects
his grounds for hope to a world that is harsh and full of disappointment, it is a great pleasure to be
critical examination. • He able to fantasize about a person you are involved with.
tries to recoup by indulging
This makes the seducer's task easy: people are dying to be given the
in other pleasures but finds
chance to fantasize about you. Do not spoil this golden opportunity by
them inane. He is seized
by the dread of a frightful overexposing yourself, or becoming so familiar and banal that the target
calamity and now sees you exactly as you are. You do not have to be an angel, or a paragon of
concentrates fully. Thus
virtue—that would be quite boring. You can be dangerous, naughty, even
begins: • 7. The second
crystallization, which somewhat vulgar, depending on the tastes of your victim. But never be or-
deposits diamond layers of dinary or limited. In poetry (as opposed to reality), anything is possible.
proof that "she loves me."
Soon after we fall under a person's spell, we form an image in our
• Every few minutes
throughout the night which minds of who they are and what pleasures they might offer. Thinking of
follows the birth of doubt, them when we are alone, we tend to make this image more and more ide-
the lover has a moment of
alized. The novelist Stendhal, in his book On Love, calls this phenomenon
dreadful misgiving, and
"crystallization," telling the story of how, in Salzburg, Austria, they used to
then reassures himself "she
loves me"; and throw a leafless branch into the abandoned depths of a salt mine in the
crystallization begins to middle of winter. When the branch was pulled out months later, it would
reveal new charms. Then
be covered with spectacular crystals. That is what happens to a loved one in
once again the haggard eye
of doubt pierces him and he our minds.
stops transfixed. He forgets According to Stendhal, though, there are two crystallizations. The first
to draw breath and mutters,
happens when we first meet the person. The second and more important
"But does she love me?"
Torn between doubt and one happens later, when a bit of doubt creeps in—you desire the other per-
delight, the poor lover son, but they elude you, you are not sure they are yours. This bit of doubt
convinces himself that she
is critical—it makes your imagination work double, deepens the poeticizing
could give him such
pleasure as he could find process. In the seventeenth century, the great rake the Duc de Lauzun
nowhere else on earth. pulled off one of the most spectacular seductions in history—that of the
—STENDHAL, LOVE, Grande Mademoiselle, the cousin of King Louis XIV, and the wealthiest
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND and most powerful woman in France. He tickled her imagination with a
SUZANNE SALE
few brief encounters at the court, letting her catch glimpses of his wit, his
audacity, his cool manner. She would begin to think of him when she was
alone. Next she started to bump into him more often at court, and they
would have little conversations or walks. When these meetings were over,
Falling in love
she would be left with a doubt: is he or is he not interested in me? This
automatically tends toward
madness. Left to itself, it made her want to see him more, in order to allay her doubts. She began to
goes to utter extremes. This idealize him all out of proportion to the reality, for the duke was an incor-
is well known by the rigible scoundrel.
"conquistadors" of both
sexes. Once a woman's Remember: if you are easily had, you cannot be worth that much. It is

[PAGE 311]
Poeticize Your Presence • 283
hard to wax poetic about a person who comes so cheaply. If, after the initial attention is fixed upon a
interest, you make it clear that you cannot be taken for granted, if you stir a man, it is very easy for
him to dominate her
bit of doubt, the target will imagine there is something special, lofty, and
thoughts completely. A
unattainable about you. Your image will crystallize in the other person's
simple game of blowing
mind. hot and cold, of
Cleopatra knew that she was really no different from any other woman, solicitousness and disdain,
of presence and absence is
and in fact her face was not particularly beautiful. But she knew that men
all that is required. The
have a tendency to overvalue a woman. All that is required is to hint that rhythm of that technique
there is something different about you, to make them associate you with acts upon a woman's
attention like a pneumatic
something grand or poetic. She made Caesar aware of her connection to
machine and ends by
the great kings and queens of Egypt's past; with Antony, she created the emptying her of all the rest
fantasy that she was descended from Aphrodite herself. These men were ca- of the world. How well our
people put it: "to suck
vorting not just with a strong-willed woman but a kind of goddess. Such
one's senses"! In fact: one
associations might be difficult to pull off today, but people still get deep is absorbed—absorbed by
pleasure from associating others with some kind of childhood fantasy fig- an object! Most "love
affairs" are reduced to this
ure. John F. Kennedy presented himself as a figure of chivalry—noble,
mechanical play of the
brave, charming. Pablo Picasso was not just a great painter with a thirst for
beloved upon the lover's
young girls, he was the Minotaur of Greek legend, or the devilish trickster attention. • The only thing
figure that is so seductive to women. These associations should not be made that can save a lover is a
violent shock from the
too early; they are only powerful once the target has begun to fall under
outside, a treatment which
your spell, and is vulnerable to suggestion. A man who had just met is forced upon him. Many
Cleopatra would have found the Aphrodite association ludicrous. But a think that absence and long
trips are a good cure for
person who is falling in love will believe almost anything. The trick is to as-
lovers. Observe that these
sociate your image with something mythic, through the clothes you wear, are cures for one's
the things you say, the places you go. attention. Distance from
the beloved starves our
In Marcel Proust's novel Remembrance of Things Past, the character
attention toward him; it
Swann finds himself gradually seduced by a woman who is not really his prevents anything further
type. He is an aesthete, and loves the finer things in life. She is of a lower from rekindling the
attention. Journeys, by
class, less refined, even a little tasteless. What poeticizes her in his mind is a
physically obliging us to
series of exuberant moments they share together, moments that from then
come out of ourselves and
on he associates with her. One of these is a concert in a salon that they at- resolve hundreds of little
tend, in which he is intoxicated by a little melody in a sonata. Whenever he problems, by uprooting us
from our habitual setting
thinks of her, he remembers this little phrase. Little gifts she has given him,
and forcing hundreds of
objects she has touched or handled, begin to assume a life of their own. unexpected objects upon us,
Any kind of heightened experience, artistic or spiritual, lingers in the mind succeed in breaking down
the maniac's haven and
much longer than normal experience. You must find a way to share such
opening channels in his
moments with your targets—a concert, a play, a spiritual encounter, what- sealed consciousness,
ever it takes—so that they associate something elevated with you. Shared through which fresh air and
normal perspective enter.
moments of exuberance have immense seductive pull. Also, any kind of
object can be imbued with poetic resonance and sentimental associations, as —JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET,
ON LOVE: ASPECTS OF A
discussed in the last chapter. The gifts you give and other objects can be-
SINGLE THEME, TRANSLATED BY
come imbued with your presence; if they are associated with pleasant TOBY TALBOT
memories, the sight of them keeps you in mind and accelerates the poeti-
cization process.
Although it is said that absence makes the heart grow fonder, an ab-
sence too early will prove deadly to the crystallization process. Like Eva

[PAGE 312]
284 • The Art of Seduction
Excessive familiarity can Perón, you must surround your targets with focused attention, so that in
destroy crystallization. A those critical moments when they are alone, their mind is spinning with a
charming girl of sixteen
kind of afterglow. Do everything you can to keep the target thinking about
was becoming too fond of a
you. Letters, mementos, gifts, unexpected meetings—all these give you an
handsome young man of
the same age, who used to omnipresence. Everything must remind them of you.
make a practice of passing Finally, if your targets should see you as elevated and poetic, there is
beneath her window every
much to be gained by making them feel elevated and poeticized in their
evening at nightfall. Her
mother invited him to turn. The French writer Chateaubriand would make a woman feel like a
spend a week with them goddess, she had such a powerful effect on him. He would send her poems
in the country. It was a
that she supposedly had inspired. To make Queen Victoria feel as if she
bold remedy, I admit,
but the girl was of a were both a seductive woman and a great leader, Benjamin Disraeli would
romantic disposition, and compare her to mythological figures and great predecessors, such as Queen
the young man a trifle
Elizabeth I. By idealizing your targets this way, you will make them idealize
dull; within three days she
you in return, since you must be equally great to be able to appreciate and
despised him.
see all of their fine qualities. They will also grow addicted to the elevated
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND feeling you give them.
SUZANNE SALE
Symbol: The Halo.
Slowly, when the target is alone, he or she begins to
imagine a kind of faint glow around your head, formed by all of
the possible pleasures you might offer, the radiance of your charged
presence, your noble qualities. The Halo separates you from other
people. Do not make it disappear by becoming fa-
miliar and ordinary.
Reversal
It might seem that the reverse tactic would be to reveal everything about
yourself, to be completely honest about your faults and virtues. This kind
of sincerity was a quality Lord Byron had—he almost got a thrill out of
disclosing all of his nasty, ugly qualities, even going so far, later on in his
life, as to tell people about his incestuous involvements with his half sister.
This kind of dangerous intimacy can be immensely seductive. The target
will poeticize your vices, and your honesty about them; they will start to
see more than is there. In other words, the idealization process is unavoid-
able. The only thing that cannot be idealized is mediocrity, but there is
nothing seductive about mediocrity. There is no possible way to seduce
without creating some kind of fantasy and poeticization.

[PAGE 313]
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness
and Vulnerability
Too much ma-
neuvering on your part may raise
suspicion. The best way to cover your tracks
is to make the other person feel superior and
stronger. If you seem to be weak, vulnerable, enthralled
by the other person, and unable to control yourself, you will
make your actions look more natural, less calculated. Physical
weakness—tears, bashfulness, paleness—will help create the ef-
fect. To further win trust, exchange honesty for virtue: establish
your "sincerity" by confessing some sin on your part—it doesn't
have to be real. Sincerity is more important than goodness. Play
the victim, then transform your target's sympathy into love.

[PAGE 314]


[PAGE 315]
The Victim Strategy
That sweltering August in the 1770s when the Présidente de Tourvel
was visiting the château of her old friend Madame de Rosemonde,
leaving her husband at home, she was expecting to be enjoying the peace
and quiet of country life more or less on her own. But she loved the simple
pleasures, and soon her daily life at the château assumed a comfortable
pattern—daily Mass, walks in the country, charitable work in the neighbor- The weak ones do have a
ing villages, card games in the evening. When Madame de Rosemonde's power over us. The clear,
forceful ones I can do
nephew arrived for a visit, then, the Présidente felt uncomfortable—but
without. I am weak and
also curious. indecisive by nature myself,
The nephew, the Vicomte de Valmont, was the most notorious liber- and a woman who is quiet
and withdrawn and follows
tine in Paris. He was certainly handsome, but he was not what she had ex-
the wishes of a man even
pected: he seemed sad, somewhat downtrodden, and strangest of all, he to the point of letting
paid hardly any attention to her. The Présidente was no coquette; she herself be used has much
the greater appeal. A man
dressed simply, ignored fashions, and loved her husband. Still, she was
can shape and mold her as
young and beautiful, and was used to fending off men's attentions. In the he wishes, and becomes
back of her mind, she was slightly perturbed that he took so little notice offonder of her all the while.
her. Then, at Mass one day, she caught a glimpse of Valmont apparently lost —MURASAKI SHIKIBU,
in prayer. The idea dawned on her that he was in the midst of a period of THE TALE OF GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
soul-searching.
SEIDENSTICKER
As soon as word had leaked out that Valmont was at the château, the
Présidente had received a letter from a friend warning her against this dan-
gerous man. But she thought of herself as the last woman in the world to
Hera, daughter of Cronus
be vulnerable to him. Besides, he seemed on the verge of repenting his evil and Rhea, having been
past; perhaps she could help move him in that direction. What a wonderful born on the island of
Samos or, some say, at
victory that would be for God. And so the Présidente took note of Val-
Argos, was brought up in
mont's comings and goings, trying to understand what was happening in Arcadia by Temenus, sou
his head. It was strange, for instance, that he would often leave in the of Pelasgus. The Seasons
were her nurses. After
morning to go hunting, yet would never return with any game. One day,
banishing their father
she decided to have her servant do a little harmless spying, and she was Cronus, Hera's twin
amazed and delighted to learn that Valmont had not gone hunting at all; he brother Zeus sought her
had visited a local village, where he had doled out money to a poor family out at Cnossus in Crete or,
some say, on Mount
about to be evicted from their home. Yes, she was right, his passionate soul
Thornax (now called
was moving from sensuality to virtue. How happy that made her feel. Cuckoo Mountain) in
That evening, Valmont and the Présidente found themselves alone for Argolis, where he courted
her, at first unsuccessfully.
the first time, and Valmont suddenly burst out with a startling confession.
She took pity on him only
He was head-over-heels in love with the Présidente, and with a love he had when he adopted the
287

[PAGE 316]
288 • The Art of Seduction
disguise of a bedraggled never experienced before: her virtue, her goodness, her beauty, her kind
cuckoo and tenderly ways had completely overwhelmed him. His generosity to the poor that
warmed him in her bosom.
afternoon had been for her sake—perhaps inspired by her, perhaps some-
There he at once resumed
his true shape and ravished thing more sinister: it had been to impress her. He would never have con-
her, so that she was fessed to this, but finding himself alone with her, he could not control his
shamed into marrying him.
emotions. Then he got down on his knees and begged for her to help him,
—ROBERT GRAVES, to guide him in his misery.
THE GREEK MYTHS
The Présidente was caught off guard, and began to cry. Intensely em-
barrassed, she ran from the room, and for the next few days pretended to be
ill. She did not know how to react to the letters Valmont now began to
In a strategy (?) of
send her, begging her to forgive him. He praised her beautiful face and her
seduction one draws the
other into one's area of beautiful soul, and claimed she had made him rethink his whole life. These
weakness, which is also his emotional letters produced disturbing emotions, and Tourvel prided herself
or her area of weakness. A
on her calmness and prudence. She knew she should insist that he leave the
calculated weakness, an
incalculable weakness: one château, and wrote him to that effect; he reluctantly agreed, but on one
challenges the other to be condition—that she allow him to write to her from Paris. She consented, as
taken in....• To seduce
long as the letters were not offensive. When he told Madame de Rose-
is to appear weak. To
monde that he was leaving, the Présidente felt a pang of guilt: his host-
seduce is to render weak.
We seduce with our ess and aunt would miss him, and he looked so pale. He was obviously
weakness, never with suffering.
strong signs or powers. In
Now the letters from Valmont began to arrive, and Tourvel soon re-
seduction we enact this
weakness, and this is what gretted allowing him this liberty. He ignored her request that he avoid the
gives seduction its strength. subject of love—indeed he vowed to love her forever. He rebuked her for
• We seduce with our
her coldness and insensitivity. He explained his bad path in life—it was not
death, our vulnerability,
and with the void that his fault, he had had no direction, had been led astray by others. Without
haunts us. The secret is to her help he would fall back into that world. Do not be cruel, he said, you
know how to play with
are the one who seduced me. I am your slave, the victim of your charms
death in the absence of a
gaze or gesture, in the and goodness; since you are strong, and do not feel as I do, you have noth-
absence of knowledge or ing to fear. Indeed the Présidente de Tourvel came to pity Valmont—he
meaning. • Psychoanalysis seemed so weak, so out of control. How could she help him? And why was
tells us to assume our
she even thinking of him, which she now did more and more? She was a
fragility and passivity, but
in almost religious terms, happily married woman. No, she must at least put an end to this tiresome
turns them into a form of correspondence. No more talk of love, she wrote, or she would not reply.
resignation and acceptance
His letters stopped coming. She felt relief. Finally some peace and quiet.
in order to promote a well-
tempered psychic One evening, however, as she was seated at the dinner table, she sud-
equilibrium. Seduction, by denly heard Valmont's voice from behind her, addressing Madame de Rose-
contrast, plays trumph-
monde. On the spur of the moment, he said, he had decided to return for
antty with weakness,
making a game of it, with a short visit. She felt a shiver up and down her spine, her face flushed; he
its own rules. approached and sat down beside her. He looked at her, she looked away,
and soon made an excuse to leave the table and go up to her room. But she
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY could not completely avoid him over the next few days, and she saw that he
BRIAN SINGER
seemed paler than ever. He was polite, and a whole day might pass without
her seeing him, but these brief absences had a paradoxical effect: now
Tourvel realized what had happened. She missed him, she wanted to see
him. This paragon of virtue and goodness had somehow fallen in love with
an incorrigible rake. Disgusted with herself and what she had allowed to

[PAGE 317]
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 289
happen, she left the château in the middle of the night, without telling The old American proverb
anyone, and headed for Paris, where she planned somehow to repent this says if you want to con
someone, you must first get
awful sin.
him to trust you, or at least
feel superior to you (these
two ideas are related), and
Interpretation. The character of Valmont in Choderlos de Laclos's get him to let down his
guard. The proverb
epistolary novel Dangerous Liaisons is based on several of the great real-life
explains a great deal about
libertines of eighteenth-century France. Everything Valmont does is calcu- television commercials. If
lated for effect—the ambiguous actions that make Tourvel curious about we assume that people are
not stupid, they must react
him, the act of charity in the village (he knows he is being followed), the
to TV commercials with a
return visit to the château, the paleness of his face (he is having an affairfeeling of superiority that
with a girl at the château, and their all-night carousals give him a wasted permits them to believe
they are in control. As long
look). Most devastating of all is his positioning of himself as the weak one,
as this illusion of volition
the seduced, the victim. How can the Présidente imagine he is manipulat-
persists, they would
ing her when everything suggests he is simply overwhelmed by her beauty, consciously have nothing to
whether physical or spiritual? He cannot be a deceiver when he repeatedly fear from the commercials.
People are prone to trust
makes a point of confessing the "truth" about himself: he admits that his
anything over which they
charity was questionably motivated, he explains why he has gone astray, he believe they have
lets her in on his emotions. (All of this "honesty," of course, is calculated.) control. . . . • TV com-
mercials appear foolish,
In essence he is like a woman, or at least like a woman of those times—
clumsy, and ineffectual on
emotional, unable to control himself, moody, insecure. She is the one who purpose. They are made to
is cold and cruel, like a man. In positioning himself as Tourvel's victim, Val- appear this way at the
conscious level in order to
mont can not only disguise his manipulations but elicit pity and concern.
be consciously ridiculed and
Playing the victim, he can stir up the tender emotions produced by a sick rejected. . . . Most ad men
child or a wounded animal. And these emotions are easily channeled into will confirm that over the
love—as the Présidente discovers to her dismay. years the seemingly worst
commercials have sold the
Seduction is a game of reducing suspicion and resistance. The cleverest best. An effective TV
way to do this is to make the other person feel stronger, more in control of commercial is purposefully
designed to insult the
things. Suspicion usually comes out of insecurity; if your targets feel supe-
viewer's conscious
rior and secure in your presence, they are unlikely to doubt your motives.
intelligence, thereby
You are too weak, too emotional, to be up to something. Take this game as penetrating his defenses.
far as it will go. Flaunt your emotions and how deeply they have affected
—WILSON BRYAN KEY,
you. Making people feel the power they have over you is immensely flatter- SUBLIMINAL SEDUCTION
ing to them. Confess to something bad, or even to something bad that you
did, or contemplated doing, to them. Honesty is more important than
virtue, and one honest gesture will blind them to many deceitful acts. Cre- It takes great art to use
ate an impression of weakness—physical, mental, emotional. Strength and bashfulness, but one does
achieve a great deal with it.
confidence can be frightening. Make your weakness a comfort, and play
How often I have used
the victim—of their power over you, of circumstances, of life in general. bashfulness to trick a little
This is the best way to cover your tracks. miss! Ordinarily, young
girls speak very harshly
about bashful men, but
You know, a man ain't worth a damn if he can't cry at the secretly they like them. A
right time. little bashfulness flatters a
teenage girl's vanity, makes
—LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON her feel superior; it is her

[PAGE 318]
290 • The Art of Seduction
Keys to Seduction
earnest money. When they
are lulled to sleep, then at
the very time they believe We all have weaknesses, vulnerabilities, frailnesses in our mental
you are about to perish
makeup. Perhaps we are shy or oversensitive, or need attention—
from bashfulness, you show
them that you are so far whatever the weakness is, it is something we cannot control. We may try to
from it that you are quite compensate for it, or to hide it, but this is often a mistake: people sense
self-reliant. Bashfulness
something inauthentic or unnatural. Remember: what is natural to your
makes a man lose his
masculine significance, and character is inherently seductive. A person's vulnerability, what they seem
therefore it is a relatively to be unable to control, is often what is most seductive about them. People
good means for
who display no weaknesses, on the other hand, often elicit envy, fear, and
neutralizing the sex
relation. anger—we want to sabotage them just to bring them down.
Do not struggle against your vulnerabilities, or try to repress them, but
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY, put them into play. Learn to transform them into power. The game is sub-
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V. tle: if you wallow in your weakness, overplay your hand, you will be seen as
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
angling for sympathy, or, worse, as pathetic. No, what works best is to allow
people an occasional glimpse into the soft, frail side of your character, and
usually only after they have known you for a while. That glimpse will hu-
Yet another form of manize you, lowering their suspicions, and preparing the ground for a
Charity is there, which is
deeper attachment. Normally strong and in control, at moments you let go,
oft times practised towards
poor prisoners who are shut give in to your weakness, let them see it.
up in dungeons and robbed Valmont used his weakness this way. He had lost his innocence long
of all enjoyments with
ago, and yet, somewhere inside, he regretted it. He was vulnerable to
women. On such do the
gaolers' wives and women someone truly innocent. His seduction of the Présidente was successful be-
that have charge over them, cause it was not totally an act; there was a genuine weakness on his part,
or chatelaines who have which even allowed him to cry at times. He let the Présidente see this side
prisoners of war in their
to him at key moments, in order to disarm her. Like Valmont, you can be
Castle, take pity and give
them share of their love out acting and sincere at the same time. Suppose you are genuinely shy—at cer-
of very charity and tain moments, give your shyness a little weight, lay it on a little thick. It
mercifulness. . . . • Thus
should be easy for you to embellish a quality you already have.
do these gaolers' wives,
noble chatelaines and After Lord Byron published his first major poem, in 1812, he became
others, treat their prisoners, an instant celebrity. Beyond being a talented writer, he was so handsome,
the which, captive and
even pretty, and he was as brooding and enigmatic as the characters he
unhappy though they be,
yet cease not for that to feel wrote about. Women went wild over Lord Byron. He had an infamous
the prickings of the flesh, "underlook," slightly lowering his head and glancing upward at a woman,
as much as ever they did in
making her tremble. But Byron had other qualities: when you first met
their best days. . . . • To
him, you could not help noticing his fidgety movements, his ill-fitting
confirm what I say, I will
instance a tale that clothes, his strange shyness, and his noticeable limp. This infamous man,
Captain Beaulieu, who scorned all conventions and seemed so dangerous, was personally inse-
Captain of the King's
cure and vulnerable.
Galleys, of whom I have
before spoke once and In Byron's poem Don Juan, the hero is less a seducer of women than a
again, did tell me. He was man constantly pursued by them. The poem was autobiographical; women
in the service of the late
wanted to take care of this somewhat fragile man, who seemed to have lit-
Grand Prior of France, a
member of the house of tle control over his emotions. More than a century later, John F. Kennedy,
Lorraine, who was much as a boy, became obsessed with Byron, the man he most wanted to emulate.
attached to him. Going
He even tried to borrow Byron's "underlook." Kennedy himself was a frail
one time to take his patron
on board at Malta in a youth, with constant health problems. He was also a little pretty, and friends

[PAGE 319]
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 291
saw something slightly feminine in him. Kennedy's weaknesses—physical frigate, he was taken by the
and mental, for he too was insecure, shy, and oversensitive—were exactly Sicilian galleys, and carried
prisoner to the Castel-à-
what drew women to him. If Byron and Kennedy had tried to cover up
mare at Palermo, where he
their vulnerabilities with a masculine swagger they would have had no was shut up in an
seductive charm. Instead, they learned how to subtly display their weak- exceeding narrow, dark and
nesses, letting women sense this soft side to them. wretched dungeon, and
very ill entreated by the
There are fears and insecurities peculiar to each sex; your use of strate-
space of three months. By
gic weakness must always take these differences into account. A woman, for good hap the Governor of
instance, may be attracted by a man's strength and self-confidence, but too the Castle, who was a
Spaniard, had two very
much of it can create fear, seeming unnatural, even ugly Particularly intimi-
fair daughters, who hearing
dating is the sense that the man is cold and unfeeling. She may feel insecure him complaining and
that he is only after sex, and nothing else. Male seducers long ago learned making moan, did one day
ask leave of their father to
to become more feminine—to show their emotions, and to seem interested
visit him, for the honor of
in their targets' lives. The medieval troubadours were the first to master this the good God; and this he
strategy; they wrote poetry in honor of women, emoted endlessly about did freely give them
permission to do. And
their feelings, and spent hours in their ladies' boudoirs, listening to the
seeing the Captain was of
women's complaints and soaking up their spirit. In return for their willing-
a surety a right gallant
ness to play weak, the troubadours earned the right to love. gentleman, and as ready-
tongued as most, he was
Little has changed since then. Some of the greatest seducers in recent
able so to win them over at
history—Gabriele D' Annunzio, Duke Ellington, Errol Flynn—understood
this, the very first visit,
the value of acting slavishly to a woman, like a troubadour on bended knee. that they did gain their
The key is to indulge your softer side while still remaining as masculine as father's leave for him to
quit his wretched dungeon
possible. This may include an occasional show of bashfulness, which the
and to be put in a seemly
philosopher Søren Kierkegaard thought an extremely seductive tactic for a enough chamber and
man—it gives the woman a sense of comfort, and even of superiority. Re- receive better treatment.
Nor was this all, for they
member, though, to keep everything in moderation. A glimpse of shyness
did crave and get
is sufficient; too much of it and the target will despair, afraid that she will permission to come and see
end up having to do all the work. him freely every day and
converse with him. • And
A man's fears and insecurities often concern his sense of masculinity; he
this did fall out so well that
usually will feel threatened by a woman who is too overtly manipulative, presently both the twain of
who is too much in control. The greatest seductresses in history knew how them were in love with
to cover up their manipulations by playing the little girl in need of mascu- him, albeit he was not
handsome to look upon,
line protection. A famous courtesan of ancient China, Su Shou, used to
and they very fair ladies.
make up her face to look particularly pale and weak. She would also walk And so, without a thought
in a way that made her seem frail. The great nineteenth-century courtesan of the chance of more
rigorous imprisonment or
Cora Pearl would literally dress and act like a little girl. Marilyn Monroe
even death, but rather
knew how to give the impression that she depended on a man's strength to tempted by such
survive. In all of these instances, the women were the ones in control of opportunities, he did set
himself to the enjoyment of
the dynamic, boosting a man's sense of masculinity in order to ultimately
the two girls with good will
enslave him. To make this most effective, a woman should seem both in and hearty appetite. And
need of protection and sexually excitable, giving the man his ultimate these pleasures did continue
without any scandal, for so
fantasy.
fortunate was he in this
The Empress Josephine, wife of Napoleon Bonaparte, won dominance conquest of his for the space
over her husband early on through a calculated coquetry. Later on, though, of eight whole months, that
no scandal did ever hap all
she held on to that power through her constant—and not so innocent—use
that time, and no ill,
of tears. Seeing someone cry usually has an immediate effect on our emo-

[PAGE 320]
292 • The Art of Seduction
inconvenience, nor any tions: we cannot remain neutral. We feel sympathy, and most often will do
surprise or discovery at all. anything to stop the tears—including things that we normally would not
For indeed the two sisters
do. Weeping is an incredibly potent tactic, but the weeper is not always so
had so good an under-
standing between them and innocent. There is usually something real behind the tears, but there may
did so generously lend a also be an element of acting, of playing for effect. (And if the target senses
hand to each other and so
this the tactic is doomed.) Beyond the emotional impact of tears, there is
obligingly play sentinel to
one another, that no ill hap something seductive about sadness. We want to comfort the other person,
did ever occur. And he and as Tourvel discovered, that desire quickly turns into love. Affecting sad-
swore to me, being my very ness, even crying sometimes, has great strategic value, even for a man. It is a
intimate friend as he was,
skill you can learn. The central character of the eighteenth-century French
that never in his days of
greatest liberty had he novel Marianne, by Marivaux, would think of something sad in her past to
enjoyed so excellent make herself cry or look sad in the present.
entertainment or felt keener
Use tears sparingly, and save them for the right moment. Perhaps this
ardor or better appetite for
it than in the said might be a time when the target seems suspicious of your motives, or when
prison—which truly was a you are worrying about having no effect on him or her. Tears are a sure
right good prison for him,
barometer of how deeply the other person is falling for you. If they seem
albeit folk say no prison
can be good. And this annoyed, or resist the bait, your case is probably hopeless.
happy time did continue for In social and political situations, seeming too ambitious, or too con-
the space of eight months,
trolled, will make people fear you; it is crucial to show your soft side. The
till the truce was made
display of a single weakness will hide a multitude of manipulations. Emo-
betwixt the Emperor and
Henri II., King of France, tion or even tears will work here too. Most seductive of all is playing the
whereby all prisoners did victim. For his first speech in Parliament, Benjamin Disraeli prepared an
leave their dungeons and
elaborate oration, but when he delivered it the opposition yelled and
were released. He sware
that never was he more laughed so loudly that hardly any of it could be heard. He plowed ahead
grieved than at quitting and gave the whole speech, but by the time he sat down he felt he had
this good prison of his, but
failed miserably. Much to his amazement, his colleagues told him the
was exceeding sorry to
leave these fair maids, with speech was a marvelous success. It would have been a failure if he had com-
whom he was in such high plained or given up; but by going ahead as he did, he positioned himself as
favor, and who did express
the victim of a cruel and unreasonable faction. Almost everyone sympa-
all possible regrets at his
departing. thized with him now, which would serve him well in the future. Attacking
your mean-spirited opponents can make you seem ugly as well; instead,
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
soak up their blows, and play the victim. The public will rally to your side,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R. in an emotional response that will lay the groundwork for a grand political
ALLINSON
seduction.
Symbol: The Blemish. A beautiful face is a delight to look at, but
if it is too perfect it leaves us cold, and even slightly intimidated.
It is the little mole, the beauty mark, that makes the face
human and lovable. So do not conceal all of your
blemishes. You need them to soften your
features and elicit tender
feelings.

[PAGE 321]
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 293
Reversal
Timing is everything in seduction; you should always look for signs that
the target is falling under your spell. A person falling in love tends to
ignore the other person's weaknesses, or to see them as endearing. An
unseduced, rational person, on the other hand, may find bashfulness or
emotional outbursts pathetic. There are also certain weaknesses that have
no seductive value, no matter how in love the target may be.
The great seventeenth-century courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos liked men
with a soft side. But sometimes a man would go too far, complaining that
she did not love him enough, that she was too fickle and independent, that
he was being mistreated and wronged. For Ninon, such behavior would
break the spell, and she would quickly end the relationship. Complaining,
whining, neediness, and actively appealing for sympathy will appear to your
targets not as charming weaknesses but as manipulative attempts at a kind of
negative power. So when you play the victim, do it subtly, without overad-
vertising it. The only weaknesses worth playing up are the ones that will
make you seem lovable. All others should be repressed and eradicated at all
costs.

[PAGE 322]


[PAGE 323]
Confuse Desire and Reality—
The Perfect Illusion
To
compensate for the difficulties in their
lives, people spend a lot of their time daydreaming, imag-
ining a future full of adventure, success, and romance. If you can
create the illusion that through you they can live out their
dreams, you will have them at your mercy. It is im-
portant to start slowly, gaining their trust,
and gradually constructing the fantasy
that matches their desires. Aim at
secret wishes that have been thwarted
or repressed, stirring up uncontrollable
emotions, clouding their powers of reason. The
perfect illusion is one that does not depart too much from
reality, but has a touch of the unreal to it, like a waking dream,
head the seduced to a point of confusion in which they can
no longer tell the difference between illusion
and reality.

[PAGE 324]


[PAGE 325]
Fantasy in the Flesh
In 1964, a twenty-year-old Frenchman named Bernard Bouriscout ar-
rived in Beijing, China, to work as an accountant in the French embassy.
His first weeks there were not what he had expected. Bouriscout had
grown up in the French provinces, dreaming of travel and adventure.
When he had been assigned to come to China, images of the Forbidden
City, and of the gambling dens of Macao, had danced in his mind. But this
Lovers and madmen have
was Communist China, and contact between Westerners and Chinese was
such seething brains, \ Such
almost impossible at the time. Bouriscout had to socialize with the other shaping fantasies, that
Europeans stationed in the city, and what a boring and cliquish lot they apprehend \ More than cool
reason ever comprehends.
were. He grew lonely, regretted taking the assignment, and began making
plans to leave. —WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S
Then, at a Christmas party that year, Bouriscout's eyes were drawn to a
DREAM
young Chinese man in a corner of the room. He had never seen anyone
Chinese at any of these affairs. The man was intriguing: he was slender and
short, a bit reserved, but he had an attractive presence. Bouriscout went up
He was not a sex person.
and introduced himself. The man, Shi Pei Pu, proved to be a writer of He was like . . . somebody
Chinese-opera librettos who also taught Chinese to members of the who had come down from
the clouds. He was not
French embassy. Aged twenty-six, he spoke perfect French. Everything
human. You could not say
about him fascinated Bouriscout; his voice was like music, soft and whis- he was a man friend or a
pery, and he left you wanting to know more about him. Bouriscout, al- woman friend; he was
somebody different
though usually shy, insisted on exchanging telephone numbers. Perhaps Pei
anyway. . . . You feel he
Pu could be his Chinese tutor. was only a friend who was
They met a few days later in a restaurant. Bouriscout was the only coming from another planet
and so nice also, so
Westerner there—at last a taste of something real and exotic. Pei Pu, it
overwhelming and
turned out, had been a well-known actor in Chinese operas and came from separated from the life of
a family with connections to the former ruling dynasty. Now he wrote the ground.
operas about the workers, but he said this with a look of irony They began —BERNARD BOURISCOUT, IN
to meet regularly, Pei Pu showing Bouriscout the sights of Beijing. Bouris- JOYCE WADLER, LIAISON
cout loved his stories—Pei Pu talked slowly, and every historical detail
seemed to come alive as he spoke, his hands moving to embellish his words.
This, he might say, is where the last Ming emperor hung himself, pointing Romance had again come
her way personified by a
to the spot and telling the story at the same time. Or, the cook in the
handsome young German
restaurant we just ate in once served in the palace of the last emperor, and officer, Lieutenant Konrad
then another magnificent tale would follow. Pei Pu also talked of life in the Friedrich, who called upon
her at Neuilly to ask her
Beijing Opera, where men often played women's parts, and sometimes be-
help. He wanted Pauline
came famous for it.
[Bonaparte] to use her
291

[PAGE 326]
298 • The Art of Seduction
influence with Napoleon in The two men became friends. Chinese contact with foreigners was re-
connection with providing stricted, but they managed to find ways to meet. One evening Bouriscout
for the needs of the French
tagged along when Pei Pu visited the home of a French official to tutor the
troops in the Papal States.
children. He listened as Pei Pu told them "The Story of the Butterfly," a
He made an instantaneous
impression on the princess, tale from the Chinese opera: a young girl yearns to attend an imperial
who escorted him around school, but girls are not accepted there. She disguises herself as a boy, passes
her garden until they
the exams, and enters the school. A fellow student falls in love with her,
arrived at the rockery.
There she stopped and, and she is attracted to him, so she tells him that she is actually a girl. Like
looking into the young most of these tales, the story ends tragically. Pei Pu told it with unusual
man's eyes mysteriously,
emotion; in fact he had played the role of the girl in the opera.
commanded him to return
to this same spot at the A few nights later, as they were walking before the gates of the Forbid-
same hour next day when den City, Pei Pu returned to "The Story of the Butterfly" "Look at my
she might have some good
hands," he said, "Look at my face. That story of the butterfly, it is my story
news for him. The young
officer bowed and took his too." In his slow, dramatic delivery he explained that his mother's first two
leave. . . . In his memoirs children had been girls. Sons were far more important in China; if the third
he revealed in detail what child was a girl, the father would have to take a second wife. The third child
took place after the first
came: another girl. But the mother was too frightened to reveal the truth,
meeting with Pauline: •
"At the hour agreed on I and made an agreement with the midwife: they would say that the child
again proceeded to Neuilly, was a boy, and it would be raised as such. This third child was Pei Pu.
made my way to the
Over the years, Pei Pu had had to go to extreme lengths to disguise her
appointed spot in the
garden and stood waiting sex. She never used public bathrooms, plucked her hairline to look as if she
at the rockery. I had not were balding, on and on. Bouriscout was enthralled by the story, and also
been there very long when
relieved, for like the boy in the butterfly tale, deep down he felt attracted to
a lady made her
appearance, greeted me Pei Pu. Now everything made sense—the small hands, the high-pitched
pleasantly and led me voice, the delicate neck. He had fallen in love with her, and, it seemed, the
through a side door into the feelings were reciprocated.
interior of the rockery
Pei Pu started visiting Bouriscout's apartment, and soon they were
where there were several
rooms and galleries and in sleeping together. She continued to dress as a man, even in his apartment,
one splendid salon a but women in China wore men's clothes anyway, and Pei Pu acted more
luxurious-looking bath.
like a woman than any of the Chinese women he had seen. In bed, she had
The adventure was
beginning to strike me as a shyness and a way of directing his hands that was both exciting and femi-
very romantic, almost like nine. She made everything romantic and heightened. When he was away
a fairy tale, and just as I
from her, her every word and gesture resonated in his mind. What made
was wondering what the
outcome might be a woman the affair all the more exciting was the fact that they had to keep it secret.
in a robe of the sheerest In December of 1965, Bouriscout left Beijing and returned to Paris. He
cambric entered by a side
traveled, had other affairs, but his thoughts kept returning to Pei Pu. The
door, came up to me, and
Cultural Revolution broke out in China, and he lost contact with her. Be-
smilingly asked how I liked
being there. I at once fore he had left, she had told him she was pregnant with their child. He had
recognized Napoleon's no idea whether the baby had been born. His obsession with her grew too
beautiful sister, whose
strong, and in 1969 he finagled another government job in Beijing.
perfect figure was clearly
outlined by every Contact with foreigners was now even more discouraged than on his
movement of her robe. She first visit, but he managed to track Pei Pu down. She told him she had
held out her hand for me to
borne a son, in 1966, but he had looked like Bouriscout, and given the
kiss and told me to sit
down on the couch beside growing hatred of foreigners in China, and the need to keep the secret of
her. On this occasion I her sex, she had him sent him away to an isolated region near Russia. It was
certainly was not the
so cold there—perhaps he was dead. She showed Bouriscout photographs

[PAGE 327]
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 299
of the boy, and he did see some resemblance. Over the next few weeks they
seducer. . . . After an
managed to meet here and there, and then Bouriscout had an idea: he sym- interval Pauline pulled a
pathized with the Cultural Revolution, and he wanted to get around the hell rope and ordered the
woman who answered to
prohibitions that were preventing him from seeing Pei Pu, so he offered to
prepare a hath which she
do some spying. The offer was passed along to the right people, and soon asked me to share.
Bouriscout was stealing documents for the Communists. The son, named Wearing bathgowns of the
finest linen we remained
Bertrand, was recalled to Beijing, and Bouriscout finally met him. Now a
for nearly an hour in the
threefold adventure filled Bouriscout's life: the alluring Pei Pu, the thrill of crystal-clear bluish water.
being a spy, and the illicit child, whom he wanted to bring back to France. Then we had a grand
dinner served in another
In 1972, Bouriscout left Beijing. Over the next few years he tried
room and lingered on
repeatedly to get Pei Pu and his son to France, and a decade later he fi- together until dusk. When
nally succeeded; the three became a family In 1983, though, the French I left I had to promise to
return again soon and I
authorities grew suspicious of this relationship between a Foreign Office
spent many afternoons
official and a Chinese man, and with a little investigating they uncovered
with the princess in the
Bouriscout's spying. He was arrested, and soon made a startling confession: same way."
the man he was living with was really a woman. Confused, the French or-
—HARRISON BRENT,
dered an examination of Pei Pu; as they had thought, he was very much a PAULINE BONAPARTE: A
WOMAN OF AFFAIRS
man. Bouriscout went to prison.
Even after Bouriscout had heard his former lover's own confession, he
was still convinced that Pei Pu was a woman. Her soft body, their inti-
mate relationship—how could he be wrong? Only when Pei Pu, impris- The courtesan is meant to
be a half-defined, floating
oned in the same jail, showed him the incontrovertible proof of his sex did
figure never fixing herself
Bouriscout finally accept it. surely in the imagination.
She is the memory of an
experience, the point at
which a dream is
Interpretation. The moment Pei Pu met Bouriscout, he realized he had
transformed into reality or
found the perfect victim. Bouriscout was lonely, bored, desperate. The way reality into a dream. The
he responded to Pei Pu suggested that he was probably also homosexual, or bright colors fade, her name
becomes a mere echo—echo
perhaps bisexual—at least confused. (Bouriscout in fact had had homo-
of an echo, since she has
sexual encounters as a boy; guilty about them, he had tried to repress this probably adopted it from
side of himself.) Pei Pu had played women's parts before, and was quite some ancient predecessor.
The idea of the courtesan
good at it; he was slight and effeminate; physically it was not a stretch. But
is a garden of delights in
who would believe such a story, or at least not be skeptical of it? which the lover walks,
The critical component of Pei Pu's seduction, in which he brought the smelling first this flower
and then that but never
Frenchman's fantasy of adventure to life, was to start slowly and set up an
understanding whence
idea in his victim s mind. In his perfect French (which, however, was full of
comes the fragrance that
interesting Chinese expressions), he got Bouriscout used to hearing stories intoxicates him. Why
and tales, some true, some not, but all delivered in that dramatic yet believ- should the courtesan not
elude analysis? She does
able tone. Then he planted the idea of gender impersonation with his
not want to be recognized
"Story of the Butterfly." By the time he confessed the "truth" of his gen- for what she is, but rather
der, Bouriscout was already completely enchanted with him. to be allowed to be potent
and effective. She offers the
Bouriscout warded off all suspicious thoughts because he wanted to be-
truth of herself—or, rather,
lieve Pei Pu's story. From there it was easy Pei Pu faked his periods; it didn't of the passions that become
take much money to get hold of a child he could reasonably pass off as directed toward her. And
what she gives back is one's
their son. More important, he played the fantasy role to the hilt, remaining
self and an hour of grace in
elusive and mysterious (which was what a Westerner would expect from an her presence. Love revives

[PAGE 328]
300 • The Art of Seduction
when you look at her: is Asian woman) while enveloping his past and indeed their whole experience
that not enough? She is in titillating bits of history. As Bouriscout later explained, "Pei Pu screwed
the generative force of an
me in the head. ... I was having relations and in my thoughts, my dreams,
illusion, the birth point of
desire, the threshold of I was light-years away from what was true."
contemplation of bodily Bouriscout thought he was having an exotic adventure, an enduring
beauty.
fantasy of his. Less consciously, he had an outlet for his repressed homo-
—LYNNE LAWNER, LIVES OF sexuality. Pei Pu embodied his fantasy, giving it flesh, by working first on
THE COURTESANS: PORTRAITS
his mind. The mind has two currents: it wants to believe in things that are
OF THE RENAISSANCE
pleasant to believe in, yet it has a self-protective need to be suspicious of
people. If you start off too theatrical, trying too hard to create a fantasy,
you will feed that suspicious side of the mind, and once fed, the doubts will
It was on March 16, the
not go away. Instead, you must start slowly, building trust, while perhaps
same day the Duke of
Gloucester wrote to Sir letting people see a little touch of something strange or exciting about you
William, that Goethe to tease their interest. Then you build up your story, like any piece of fic-
recorded the first known
tion. You have established a foundation of trust—now the fantasies and
performance of what were
dreams you envelop them in are suddenly believable.
destined to be called
Emma's Attitudes. Just Remember: people want to believe in the extraordinary; with a little
what these were, we shall groundwork, a little mental foreplay, they will fall for your illusion. If any-
learn shortly. First, it must
thing, err on the side of reality: use real props (like the child Pei Pu showed
be emphasized that the
Attitudes were a show Bouriscout) and add the fantastical touches in your words, or an occasional
for favored eyes only. gesture that gives you a slight unreality. Once you sense that they are
• ... Goethe, disciple of
hooked, you can deepen the spell, go further and further into the fantasy.
Winckelmann, was at this
date thrilled by the human At that point they will have gone so far into their own minds that you will
form, as a contemporary no longer have to bother with verisimilitude.
writes. Here was the ideal
spectator for the classical
drama Emma and Sir
Wish Fulfillment
William had wrought in
the long winter evenings.
Let us take our seats beside
In 1762, Catherine, wife of Czar Peter III, staged a coup against her inef-
Goethe and settle to watch
the show as he describes fectual husband and proclaimed herself empress of Russia. Over the next
it. • "Sit William few years Catherine ruled alone, but kept a series of lovers. The Russians
Hamilton . . . has now,
called these men the vremienchiki, "the men of the moment," and in 1774
after many years of
devotion to the arts and the the man of the moment was Gregory Potemkin, a thirty-five-year-old lieu-
study of nature, found the tenant, ten years younger than Catherine, and a most unlikely candidate for
acme of these delights in
the role. Potemkin was coarse and not at all handsome (he had lost an eye
the person of an English
girl of twenty with a in an accident). But he knew how to make Catherine laugh, and he wor-
beautiful face and a perfect shiped her so intensely that she eventually succumbed. He quickly became
figure. He has had a the love of her life.
Greek costume made for
Catherine promoted Potemkin higher and higher in the hierarchy,
her which becomes her
extremely. Dressed in this, eventually making him the governor of White Russia, a large southwestern
he lets down her hair and, area including the Ukraine. As governor, Potemkin had to leave St. Peters-
with a few shawls, gives so
burg and go to live in the south. He knew that Catherine could not do
much variety to her poses,
gestures, expressions, etc. without male companionship, so he took it upon himself to name Cather-
that the spectator can ine's subsequent vremienchiki. She not only approved of this arrangement,
hardly believe his eyes. He
she made it clear that Potemkin would always remain her favorite.
sees what thousands of
artists would have liked to Catherine's dream was to start a war with Turkey, recapture Constan-

[PAGE 329]
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 301
tinople for the Orthodox Church, and drive the Turks out of Europe. She express realized before him
offered to share this crusade with the young Hapsburg emperor, Joseph II, in movements and
surprising transformations—
but Joseph never quite brought himself to sign the treaty that would unite
standing, kneeling, sitting,
them in war. Growing impatient, in 1783 Catherine annexed the Crimea, a
reclining, serious, sad,
southern peninsula that was mostly populated by Muslim Tartars. She asked playful, ecstatic, contrite,
Potemkin to do there what he had already managed to do in the Ukraine— alluring, threatening,
anxious, one pose follows
rid the area of bandits, build roads, modernize the ports, bring prosperity
another without a break.
to the poor. Once he had cleaned it up, the Crimea would make the per- She knows how to arrange
fect launching post for the war against Turkey the folds of her veil to
match each mood, and has
The Crimea was a backward wasteland, but Potemkin loved the chal-
a hundred ways of turning
lenge. Getting to work on a hundred different projects, he grew intoxicated it into a headdress. The old
with visions of the miracles he would perform there. He would establish a knight idolizes her and is
quite enthusiastic about
capital on the Dnieper River, Ekaterinoslav ("To the glory of Catherine"),
everything she does. In her
that would rival St. Petersburg and would house a university outshining he has found all the
anything in Europe. The countryside would hold endless fields of corn, or- antiquities, all the profiles
of Sicilian coins, even the
chards with rare fruits from the Orient, silkworm farms, new towns with
Apollo Belvedere. This
bustling marketplaces. On a visit to the empress in 1785, Potemkin talked
much is certain: as a
of these things as if they already existed, so vivid were his descriptions. The performance it's like
empress was delighted, but her ministers were skeptical—Potemkin loved nothing you ever saw before
in your life. We have
to talk. Ignoring their warnings, in 1787 Catherine arranged for a tour
already enjoyed it on two
of the area. She asked Joseph II to join her—he would be so impressed evenings."
with the modernization of the Crimea that he would immediately sign on
—FLORA FRASER,
for the war against Turkey. Potemkin, naturally, was to organize the whole EMMA, LADY HAMILTON
affair.
And so, in May of that year, after the Dnieper had thawed, Catherine
prepared for a journey from Kiev, in the Ukraine, to Sebastopol, in the
For this uncanny is in
Crimea. Potemkin arranged for seven floating palaces to carry Catherine reality nothing new or
and her retinue down the river. The journey began, and as Catherine, alien, but something which
is familiar and old-
Joseph, and the courtiers looked at the shores to either side, they saw tri-
established in the mind
umphal arches in front of clean-looking towns, their walls freshly painted; and which has become
healthy-looking cattle grazing in the pastures; streams of marching troops alienated from it only
through the process of
on the roads; buildings going up everywhere. At dusk they were enter-
repression. This reference to
tained by bright-costumed peasants, and smiling girls with flowers in their the factor of repression
hair, dancing on the shore. Catherine had traveled through this area many enables us, furthermore, to
understand Schelling's
years before, and the poverty of the peasantry there had saddened her—she
definition of the uncanny
had determined then that she would somehow change their lot. To see be-
as something which ought
fore her eyes the signs of such a transformation overwhelmed her, and she to have remained hidden
berated Potemkin's critics: Look at what my favorite has accomplished, but has come to light. . . .
• ... There is one more
look at these miracles!
point of general application
They anchored at three towns along the way, staying in each place in a which I should like to add.
magnificent, newly built palace with artificial waterfalls in the English-style . . . This is that an
uncanny effect is often and
gardens. On land they moved through villages with vibrant marketplaces;
easily produced when the
the peasants were happily at work, building and repairing. Everywhere they distinction between
spent the night, some spectacle filled their eyes—dances, parades, mytho- imagination and reality is
effaced, as when something
logical tableaux vivants, artificial volcanoes illuminating Moorish gardens.
that we have hitherto
Finally, at the end of the trip, in the palace at Sebastopol, Catherine and regarded as imaginary

[PAGE 330]
302 • The Art of Seduction
appears before us in reality, Joseph discussed the war with Turkey. Joseph reiterated his concerns. Sud-
or when a symbol takes denly Potemkin interrupted: "I have 100,000 troops waiting for me to say
over the full functions of
'Go!' " At that moment the windows of the palace were flung open, and to
the thing it symbolizes,
and so on. It is this factor the sounds of booming cannons they saw lines of troops as far as the eye
which contributes not a could see, and a fleet of ships filling the harbor. Awed by the sight, images
little to the uncanny effect
of Eastern European cities retaken from the Turks dancing in his mind,
attaching to magical
practices. The infantile Joseph II finally signed the treaty. Catherine was ecstatic, and her love for
element in this, which also Potemkin reached new heights. He had made her dreams come true.
dominates the minds of
Catherine never suspected that almost everything she had seen was pure
neurotics, is the
fakery, perhaps the most elaborate illusion ever conjured up by one man.
overaccentuation of
psychical reality in
comparison with material
reality—a feature closely
Interpretation. In the four years that he had been governor of the Crimea,
allied to the belief in the
omnipotence of thoughts. Potemkin had accomplished little, for this backwater would take decades to
improve. But in the few months before Catherine's visit he had done the
—SIGMUND FREUD,
"THE UNCANNY," IN following: every building that faced the road or the shore was given a fresh
PSYCHOLOGICAL WRITINGS coat of paint; artificial trees were set up to hide unseemly spots in the view;
AND LETTERS
broken roofs were repaired with flimsy boards painted to look like tile;
everyone the party would see was instructed to wear their best clothes and
look happy; everyone old and infirm was to stay indoors. Floating in their
palaces down the Dnieper, the imperial entourage saw brand-new villages,
but most of the buildings were only facades. The herds of cattle were
shipped from great distances, and were moved at night to fresh fields along
the route. The dancing peasants were trained for the entertainments; after
each one they were loaded into carts and hurriedly transported to a new
downriver location, as were the marching soldiers who seemed to be every-
where. The gardens of the new palaces were filled with transplanted trees
that died a few days later. The palaces themselves were quickly and badly
built, but were so magnificently furnished that no one noticed. One
fortress along the way had been built of sand, and was destroyed a little later
by a thunderstorm.
The cost of this vast illusion had been enormous, and the war with
Turkey would fail, but Potemkin had accomplished his goal. To the obser-
vant, of course, there were signs along the way that all was not as it seemed,
but when the empress herself insisted that everything was real and glori-
ous, the courtiers could only agree. This was the essence of the seduction:
Catherine had wanted so desperately to be seen as a loving and progressive
ruler, one who would defeat the Turks and liberate Europe, that when she
saw signs of change in the Crimea, her mind filled in the picture.
When our emotions are engaged, we often have trouble seeing things as
they are. Feelings of love cloud our vision, making us color events to coin-
cide with our desires. To make people believe in the illusions you create,
you need to feed the emotions over which they have least control. Often
the best way to do this is to ascertain their unsatisfied desires, their wishes
crying out for fulfillment. Perhaps they want to see themselves as noble or
romantic, but life has thwarted them. Perhaps they want an adventure. If

[PAGE 331]
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 303
something seems to validate this wish, they become emotional and irra-
tional, almost to the point of hallucination.
Remember to envelop them in your illusion slowly. Potemkin did not
start with grand spectacles, but with simple sights along the way, such as
grazing cattle. Then he brought them on land, heightening the drama, un-
til the calculated climax when the windows were flung open to reveal a
mighty war machine—actually a few thousand men and boats lined up in
such a way as to suggest many more. Like Potemkin, involve the target in
some kind of journey, physical or otherwise. The feeling of a shared adven-
ture is rife with fantasy associations. Make people feel that they are getting
to see and live out something that relates to their deepest yearnings and
they will see happy, prosperous villages where there are only facades.
Here the real journey through Potemkin's fairyland began. It
was like a dream—the waking dream of some magician who
had discovered the secret of materializing his visions. . . .
[Catherine] and her companions had left the world of reality
behind. . . . Their talk was of Iphigenia and the ancient
gods, and Catherine felt that she was both Alexander and
Cleopatra.
—GINA KAUS
Keys to Seduction
The real world can be unforgiving: events occur over which we have lit-
tle control, other people ignore our feelings in their quests to get what
they need, time runs out before we accomplish what we had wanted. If we
ever stopped to look at the present and future in a completely objective
way, we would despair. Fortunately we develop the habit of dreaming early
on. In this other, mental world that we inhabit, the future is full of rosy
possibilities. Perhaps tomorrow we will sell that brilliant idea, or meet the
person who will change our lives. Our culture stimulates these fantasies
with constant images and stories of marvelous occurrences and happy
romances.
The problem is, these images and fantasies exist only in our minds, or
on-screen. They really aren't enough—we crave the real thing, not this
endless daydreaming and titillation. Your task as a seducer is to bring some
flesh and blood into someone's fantasy life by embodying a fantasy figure,
or creating a scenario resembling that person's dreams. No one can resist
the pull of a secret desire that has come to life before their eyes. You must
first choose targets who have some repression or dream unrealized—always
the most likely victims of a seduction. Slowly and gradually, you will build
up the illusion that they are getting to see and feel and live those dreams of
theirs. Once they have this sensation they will lose contact with reality, and
begin to see your fantasy as more real than anything else. And once they

[PAGE 332]
304 • The Art of Seduction
lose touch with reality, they are (to quote Stendhal on Lord Byron's female
victims) like roasted larks that fall into your mouth.
Most people have a misconception about illusion. As any magician
knows, it need not be built out of anything grand or theatrical; the grand
and theatrical can in fact be destructive, calling too much attention to you
and your schemes. Instead create the appearance of normality. Once your
targets feel secure—nothing is out of the ordinary—you have room to de-
ceive them. Pei Pu did not spin the lie about his gender immediately; he
took his time, made Bouriscout come to him. Once Bouriscout had fallen
for it, Pei Pu continued to wear men's clothes. In animating a fantasy, the
great mistake is imagining it must be larger than life. That would border on
camp, which is entertaining but rarely seductive. Instead, what you aim for
is what Freud called the "uncanny," something strange and familiar at the
same time, like a deja vu, or a childhood memory—anything slightly irra-
tional and dreamlike. The uncanny, the mix of the real and the unreal, has
immense power over our imaginations. The fantasies you bring to life for
your targets should not be bizarre or exceptional; they should be rooted in
reality, with a hint of the strange, the theatrical, the occult (in talk of des-
tiny, for example). You vaguely remind people of something in their child-
hood, or a character in a film or book. Even before Bouriscout heard Pei
Pu's story, he had the uncanny feeling of something remarkable and fantas-
tical in this normal-looking man. The secret to creating an uncanny effect
is to keep it subtle and suggestive.
Emma Hart came from a prosaic background, her father a country
blacksmith in eighteenth-century England. Emma was beautiful, but had
no other talents to her credit. Yet she rose to become one of the greatest
seductresses in history, seducing first Sir William Hamilton, the English
ambassador to the court of Naples, and then (as Lady Hamilton, Sir Wil-
liam's wife) Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson. What was strangest when you met
her was an uncanny sense that she was a figure from the past, a woman out
of Greek myth or ancient history. Sir William was a collector of Greek and
Roman antiquities; to seduce him, Emma cleverly made herself resemble a
Greek statue, and mythical figures in paintings of the time. It was not just
the way she wore her hair, or dressed, but her poses, the way she carried
herself. It was as if one of the paintings he collected had come to life. Soon
Sir William began to host parties in his home in Naples at which Emma
would wear costumes and pose, re-creating images from mythology and
history. Dozens of men fell in love with her, for she embodied an image
from their childhood, an image of beauty and perfection. The key to this
fantasy creation was some shared cultural association—mythology, historical
seductresses like Cleopatra. Every culture has a pool of such figures from
the distant and not-so-distant past. You hint at a similarity, in spirit and in
appearance—but you are flesh and blood. What could be more thrilling
than the sense of being in the presence of some fantasy figure going back
to your earliest memories?
One night Pauline Bonaparte, the sister of Napoleon, held a gala affair

[PAGE 333]
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 305
in her house. Afterward, a handsome German officer approached her in the
garden and asked for her help in passing along a request to the emperor.
Pauline said she would do her best, and then, with a rather mysterious look
in her eye, asked him to come back to the same spot the next night. The
officer returned, and was greeted by a young woman who led him to some
rooms near the garden and then to a magnificent salon, complete with an
extravagant bath. Moments later, another young woman entered through a
side door, dressed in the sheerest garments. It was Pauline. Bells were rung,
ropes were pulled, and maids appeared, preparing the bath, giving the offi-
cer a dressing gown, then disappearing. The officer later described the eve-
ning as something out of a fairy tale, and he had the feeling that Pauline
was deliberately acting the part of some mythical seductress. Pauline was
beautiful and powerful enough to get almost any man she wanted, and she
wasn't interested simply in luring a man into bed; she wanted to envelop
him in romantic adventure, seduce his mind. Part of the adventure was the
feeling that she was playing a role, and was inviting her target along into
this shared fantasy.
Role playing is immensely pleasurable. Its appeal goes back to child-
hood, where we first learn the thrill of trying on different parts, imitating
adults or figures out of fiction. As we get older and society fixes a role on
us, a part of us yearns for the playful approach we once had, the masks we
were able to wear. We still want to play that game, to act a different role in
life. Indulge your targets in this wish by first making it clear that you are
playing a role, then inviting them to join you in a shared fantasy. The more
you set things up like a play or a piece of fiction, the better. Notice how
Pauline began the seduction with a mysterious request that the officer reap-
pear the next night; then a second woman led him into a magical series of
rooms. Pauline herself delayed her entrance, and when she appeared, she
did not mention his business with Napoleon, or anything remotely banal.
She had an ethereal air about her; he was being invited to enter a fairy
tale. The evening was real, but had an uncanny resemblance to an erotic
dream.
Casanova took role playing still further. He traveled with an enormous
wardrobe and a trunk full of props, many of them gifts for his targets—
fans, jewels, other accouterments. And some of the things he said and did
were borrowed from novels he had read and stories he had heard. He en-
veloped women in a romantic atmosphere that was heightened yet quite
real to their senses. Like Casanova, you must see the world as a kind of the-
ater. Inject a certain lightness into the roles you are playing; try to create a
sense of drama and illusion; confuse people with the slight unreality of
words and gestures inspired by fiction; in daily life, be the consummate ac-
tor. Our culture reveres actors because of their freedom to play roles. It is
something that all of us envy.
For years, the Cardinal de Rohan had been afraid that he had somehow
offended his queen, Marie Antoinette. She would not so much as look at
him. Then, in 1784, the Comtesse de Lamotte-Valois suggested to him that

[PAGE 334]
306 • The Art of Seduction
the queen was prepared not only to change this situation but actually to be-
friend him. The queen, said Lamotte-Valois, would indicate this in her
next formal reception—she would nod to him in a particular way.
During the reception, Rohan indeed noticed a slight change in the
queen's behavior toward him, and a barely perceptible glance at him. He
was overjoyed. Now the countess suggested they exchange letters, and Ro-
han spent days writing and rewriting his first letter to the queen. To his de-
light he received one back. Next the queen requested a private interview
with him in the gardens of Versailles. Rohan was beside himself with hap-
piness and anxiety. At nightfall he met the queen in the gardens, fell to the
ground, and kissed the hem of her dress. "You may hope that the past will
be forgotten," she said. At this moment they heard voices approaching, and
the queen, frightened that someone would see them together, quickly fled
with her servants. But Rohan soon received a request from her, again
through the countess: she desperately wanted to acquire the most beautiful
diamond necklace ever created. She needed a go-between to purchase it for
her, since the king thought it too expensive. She had chosen Rohan for the
task. The cardinal was only too willing; in performing this task he would
prove his loyalty, and the queen would be indebted to him forever. Rohan
acquired the necklace. The countess was to deliver it to the queen. Now
Rohan waited for the queen both to thank him and slowly to pay him
back.
Yet this never happened. The countess was in fact a grand swindler; the
queen had never nodded to him, he had only imagined it. The letters
he had received from her were forgeries, and not even very good ones. The
woman he had met in the park had been a prostitute paid to dress and act
the part. The necklace was of course real, but once Rohan had paid for it,
and handed it over to the countess, it disappeared. It was broken into parts,
which were hawked all over Europe for enormous amounts. And when
Rohan finally complained to the queen, news of the extravagant purchase
spread rapidly. The public believed Rohan's story—that the queen had in-
deed bought the necklace, and was pretending otherwise. This fiction was
the first step in the ruin of her reputation.
Everyone has lost something in life, has felt the pangs of disappoint-
ment. The idea that we can get something back, that a mistake can be
righted, is immensely seductive. Under the impression that the queen was
prepared to forgive some mistake he had made, Rohan hallucinated all
kinds of things—nods that did not exist, letters that were the flimsiest of
forgeries, a prostitute who became Marie Antoinette. The mind is infi-
nitely vulnerable to suggestion, and even more so when strong desires are
involved. And nothing is stronger than the desire to change the past, right a
wrong, satisfy a disappointment. Find these desires in your victims and cre-
ating a believable fantasy will be simple for you: few have the power to see
through an illusion they desperately want to believe in.

[PAGE 335]
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 307
Symbol: Shangri-La. Everyone has a vision in their mind of a
perfect place where people are kind and noble, where their
dreams can be realized and their wishes fulfilled, where life
is full of adventure and romance. Lead the target on a
journey there, give them a glimpse of Shangri-
La through the mists on the mountain,
and they will fall in love.
Reversal
T
here is no reversal to this chapter. No seduction can proceed without
creating illusion, the sense of a world that is real but separate from
reality.

[PAGE 336]


[PAGE 337]
Isolate the Victim
An iso-
lated person is weak.
By slowly isolating your vic-
tims, you make them more vul-
nerable to your influence. Their
isolation may be psychological: by filling
their field of vision through the pleasurable
attention you pay them, you crowd out every-
thing else in their mind. They see and think
only of you. The isolation may also be physi-
cal: you take them away from their normal mi-
lieu, friends, family, home. Give them the
sense of being marginalized, in limbo—they
are leaving one world behind and entering
another. Once isolated like this, they have
no outside support, and in their confu-
sion they are easily led astray.
Lure the seduced into your
lair, where nothing is
familiar.

[PAGE 338]


[PAGE 339]
Isolation—the Exotic Effect
In the early fifth century B.C., Fu Chai, the Chinese king of Wu, defeated
his great enemy, Kou Chien, the king of Yueh, in a series of battles. Kou
Chien was captured and forced to serve as a groom in Fu Chai's stables. He
was finally allowed to return home, but every year he had to pay a large
tribute of money and gifts to Fu Chai. Over the years, this tribute added
up, so that the kingdom of Wu prospered and Fu Chai grew wealthy
One year Kou Chien sent a delegation to Fu Chai: they wanted to In the state of Wu great
know if he would accept a gift of two beautiful maidens as part of the trib- preparations had been
made for the reception of
ute. Fu Chai was curious, and accepted the offer. The women arrived a few
the two beauties. The king
days later, amid much anticipation, and the king received them in his received them in audience
palace. The two approached the throne—their hair was magnificently coif- surrounded by his ministers
and all his court. As they
fured, in what was called "the cloud-cluster" style, ornamented with pearl
approached him the jade
ornaments and kingfisher feathers. As they walked, jade pendants hanging pendants attached to their
from their girdles made the most delicate sound. The air was full of somegirdles made a musical
sound and the air was
delightful perfume. The king was extremely pleased. The beauty of one of
fragrant with the scent of
the girls far surpassed that of the other; her name was Hsi Shih. She looked their gowns. Pearl
him in the eye without a hint of shyness; in fact she was confident and co- ornaments and kingfisher
feathers adorned their hair.
quettish, something he was not used to seeing in such a young girl.
• Fu Chai, the king of
Fu Chai called for festivities to commemorate the occasion. The halls Wu, looked into the lovely
of the palace filled with revelers; inflamed with wine, Hsi Shih danced be- eyes of Hsi Shih
fore the king. She sang, and her voice was beautiful. Reclining on a couch (495-472 B.C.) and
forgot his people and his
of white jade, she looked like a goddess. The king could not leave her side.
state. Now she did not
The next day he followed her everywhere. To his astonishment, she was turn away and blush as she
witty, sharp, and knowledgeable, and could quote the classics better than he had done three years
previously beside the little
could. When he had to leave her to deal with royal affairs, his mind was full
brook. She was complete
of her image. Soon he brought her with him to his councils, asking her ad- mistress of the art of
vice on important matters. She told him to listen less to his ministers; he seduction and she knew
how to encourage the king
was wiser than they were, his judgment superior.
to look again. Fu Chai
Hsi Shih's power grew daily. Yet she was not easy to please; if the kinghardly noticed the second
failed to grant some wish of hers, tears would fill her eyes, his heart wouldgirl, whose quiet charms
did not attract him. He
melt, and he would yield. One day she begged him to build her a palace
had eyes only for Hsi
outside the capital. Of course, he obliged her. And when he visited the
Shih, and before the
palace, he was astounded at its magnificence, even though he had paid audience was over those at
the bills: Hsi Shih had filled it with the most extravagant furnishings. The court realized that the girl
would be a force to be
grounds contained an artificial lake with marble bridges crossing over it. Fu
reckoned with and that she
Chai spent more and more time here, sitting by a pool and watching Hsi would be able to influence
311

[PAGE 340]
312 • The Art of Seduction
the king either for good Shih comb her hair, using the pool as a mirror. He would watch her play-
or ill. ...• Amidst the ing with her birds, in their jeweled cages, or simply walking through the
revelers in the halls of Wu,
palace, for she moved like a willow in the breeze. The months went by; he
Hsi Shih wove her net
of fascination about the stayed in the palace. He missed councils, ignored his family and friends, ne-
heart of the susceptible glected his public functions. He lost track of time. When a delegation came
monarch. . . . "Inflamed
to talk to him of urgent matters, he was too distracted to listen. If anything
by wine, she now begins to
but Hsi Shih took up his time, he worried unbearably that she would be
sing / The songs of Wu to
please the fatuous king; / angry.
And in the dance of Tsu Finally word reached him of a growing crisis: the fortune he had spent
she subtly blends /All
on the palace had bankrupted the treasury, and the people were discon-
rhythmic movements to her
sensuous ends." . . . But tented. He returned to the capital, but it was too late: an army from the
she could do more than kingdom of Yueh had invaded Wu, and had reached the capital. All was
sing and dance to amuse
lost. Fu Chai had no time to rejoin his beloved Hsi Shih. Instead of letting
the king. She had wit, and
her grasp of politics himself be captured by the king of Yueh, the man who had once served in
astonished him. When his stables, he committed suicide.
there was anything she
Little did he know that Kou Chien had plotted this invasion for years,
wanted she could shed tears
which so moved her lover's and that Hsi Shih's elaborate seduction was the main part of his plan.
heart that he could refuse
her nothing. For she was,
as Fan Li had said, the
Interpretation. Kou Chien wanted to make sure that his invasion of Wu
one and only, the
incomparable Hsi Shih, would not fail. His enemy was not Fu Chai's armies, or his wealth and his
whose magnetic personality resources, but his mind. If he could be deeply distracted, his mind filled
attracted everyone, many
with something other than affairs of state, he would fall like ripe fruit.
even against their own
will. . . . • Embroidered Kou Chien found the most beautiful maiden in his realm. For three
silk curtains encrusted with years he had her trained in all of the arts—not just singing, dancing, and
coral and gems, scented
calligraphy, but how to dress, how to talk, how to play the coquette. And it
furniture and screens inlaid
with jade and mother-of- worked: Hsi Shih did not allow Fu Chai a moment's rest. Everything about
pearl were among the her was exotic and unfamiliar. The more attention he paid to her hair, her
luxuries which surrounded
moods, her glances, the way she moved, the less he thought about diplo-
the favorite. . . . On one
macy and war. He was driven to distraction.
of the hills near the palace
there was a celebrated pool All of us today are kings protecting the tiny realm of our own lives,
of clear water which has weighed down by all kinds of responsibilities, surrounded by ministers and
been known ever since as
advisers. A wall forms around us—we are immune to the influence of other
the pool of the king of
Wu. Here, to amuse her people, because we are so preoccupied. Like Hsi Shih, then, you must lure
lover, Hsi Shih would your targets away, gently, slowly, from the affairs that fill their mind. And
make her toilet, using the
what will best lure them from their castles is the whiff of the exotic. Offer
pool as a mirror while
the infatuated king combed something unfamiliar that will fascinate them and hold their attention. Be
her hair. . . . different in your manners and appearance, and slowly envelop them in this
—ELOISE TALCOTT HIBBERT, different world of yours. Keep your targets off balance with coquettish
EMBROIDERED GAUZE: changes of mood. Do not worry that the disruption you represent is mak-
PORTRAITS OR FAMOUS
ing them emotional—that is a sign of their growing weakness. Most people
CHINESE LADIES
are ambivalent: on the one hand they feel comforted by their habits and
duties, on the other they are bored, and ripe for anything that seems exotic,
that seems to come from somewhere else. They may struggle or have
doubts, but exotic pleasures are irresistible. The more you can get them

[PAGE 341]
Isolate the Victim • 313
into your world, the weaker they become. As with the king of Wu, by the In Cairo Aly bumped into
time they realize what has happened, it is too late. [the singer] Juliette Greco
again. He asked her to
dance. • "You have too bad
a reputation," she replied.
Isolation—The "Only You" Effect
"We're going to sit very
much apart. " • "What are
you doing tomorrow?" he
In 1948, the twenty-nine-year-old actress Rita Hayworth, known as
insisted. • "Tomorrow I
Hollywood's Love Goddess, was at a low point in her life. Her marriage take a plane to Beirut." •
to Orson Welles was breaking up, her mother had died, and her career When she boarded the
plane, Aly was already
seemed stalled. That summer she headed for Europe. Welles was in Italy at
on it, grinning at her
the time, and in the back of her mind she was dreaming of a reconciliation. surprise. ...• Dressed in
Rita stopped first at the French Riviera. Invitations poured in, particu- tight black leather slacks
and a black sweater
larly from wealthy men, for at the time she was considered the most beauti-
[Greco] stretched
ful woman in the world. Aristotle Onassis and the Shah of Iran telephoned languorously in an
her almost daily, begging for a date. She turned them all down. A few days armchair of her Paris house
after her arrival, though, she received an invitation from Elsa Maxwell, the and observed: • "They say
I am a dangerous woman.
society hostess, who was giving a little party in Cannes. Rita balked but
Well, Aly was a dangerous
Maxwell insisted, telling her to buy a new dress, show up a little late, and man. He was charming in
make a grand entrance. a very special way. There is
a kind of man who is very
Rita played along, and arrived at the party wearing a white Grecian
clever with women. He
gown, her red hair falling over her bare shoulders. She was greeted by a re- takes you out to a
action she had grown used to: all conversation stopped as both men and restaurant and if the most
beautiful woman comes in,
women turned in their chairs, the men gazing in amazement, the women
he doesn't look at her. He
jealous. A man hurried to her side and escorted her to her table. It was makes you feel you are a
thirty-seven-year-old Prince Aly Khan, the son of the Aga Khan III, who queen. Of course, I
understood it. I didn 't
was the worldwide leader of the Islamic Ismaili sect and one of the richest
believe it. I would laugh
men in the world. Rita had been warned about Aly Khan, a notorious rake.
and point out the
To her dismay, they were seated next to each other, and he never left her beautiful woman. But that
side. He asked her a million questions—about Hollywood, her interests, on is me. . . . Most women
are made very happy by
and on. She began to relax a little and open up. There were other beautiful
that kind of attention. It's
women there, princesses, actresses, but Aly Khan ignored them all, acting as pure vanity. She thinks,
if Rita were the only woman there. He led her onto the dance floor, and 'I'll be the one and the
others will leave.'
though he was an expert dancer, she felt uncomfortable—he held her a lit-
• "... With Aly, how
tle too close. Still, when he offered to drive her back to her hotel, she the woman felt was most
agreed. They sped along the Grande Corniche; it was a beautiful night. For important. . . . He was a
great charmer, a great
one evening she had managed to forget her many problems, and she was
seducer. He made you feel
grateful, but she was still in love with Welles, and an affair with a rake like fine and that everything
Aly Khan was not what she needed. was easy. No problems.
Nothing to worry about.
Aly Khan had to fly off on business for a few days; he begged her to
Or regret. It was always,
stay at the Riviera until he got back. While he was away, he telephoned 'What can I do for you?
constantly. Every morning a giant bouquet of flowers arrived. On the tele- What do you need?'
phone he seemed particularly annoyed that the Shah of Iran was trying Airplane tickets, cars,
boats; you felt you were on
hard to see her, and he made her promise to break the date to which she
a pink cloud."
had finally agreed. During this time, a gypsy fortune-teller visited the hotel,
—LEONARD SLATER,
and Rita agreed to have her fortune read. "You are about to embark on the
ALY: A BIOGRAPHY

[PAGE 342]
314 • The Art of Seduction
ANNE: Didst thou not kill greatest romance of your life," the gypsy told her. "He is somebody you al-
this king [Henry VI]? \ ready know. . . . You must relent and give in to him totally. Only if you do
RICHARD: I grant ye. ... \ that will you find happiness at long last." Not knowing who this man could
ANNE: And thou unfit for
any place, but hell. \ be, Rita, who had a weakness for the occult, decided to extend her stay.
RICHARD: Yes, one place Aly Khan came back; he told her that his château overlooking the Mediter-
else, if you will hear me ranean was the perfect place to escape from the press and forget her trou-
name it. \ ANNE: Some
bles, and that he would behave himself. She relented. Life in the château
dungeon. \ RICHARD:
Your bedchamber, \ ANNE: was like a fairy tale; wherever she turned, his Indian helpers were there to
Ill rest betide the chamber attend to her every wish. At night he would take her into his enormous
where thou liest! \
ballroom, where they would dance all by themselves. Could this be the
RICHARD: So will it,
madam, till I lie with you. man the fortune-teller meant?
. . . But gentle Lady Aly Khan invited his friends over to meet her. Among this strange
Anne . . . \ Is not the
company she felt alone again, and depressed; she decided to leave the
causer of the timeless
deaths \ Of these château. Just then, as if he had read her thoughts, Aly Khan whisked her off
Plantagenets, Henry and to Spain, the country that fascinated her most. The press caught on to the
Edward, \ As blameful as
affair, and began to hound them in Spain: Rita had had a daughter with
the executioner? \ ANNE:
Welles—was this any way for a mother to act? Aly Khan's reputation did
Thou wast the cause and
most accursed effect. \ not help, but he stood by her, shielding her from the press as best he could.
RICHARD: Your beauty Now she was more alone than ever, and more dependent on him.
was the cause of that
Near the end of the trip, Aly Khan proposed to Rita. She turned him
effect— \ Your beauty, that
did haunt me in my sleep \ down; she did not think he was the kind of man you married. He followed
To undertake the death of her to Hollywood, where her former friends were less friendly than be-
all the world, \ So I might
fore. Thank God she had Aly Khan to help her. A year later she finally
live one hour in your sweet
bosom. succumbed, abandoning her career, moving to Aly Khan's château, and
marrying him.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
THE TRAGEDY OF KING
RICHARD III
Interpretation. Aly Khan, like a lot of men, fell in love with Rita Hay-
worth the moment he saw the film Gilda, in 1948. He made up his mind
My child, my sister, dream that he would seduce her somehow. The moment he heard she was coming
\ How sweet all things to the Riviera, he got his friend Elsa Maxwell to lure her to the party and
would seem \ Were we in
seat her next to him. He knew about the breakup of her marriage, and
that kind land to live
together, \And there love how vulnerable she was. His strategy was to block out everything else in
slow and long, \ There love her world—problems, other men, suspicion of him and his motives, etc.
and die among \ Those
His campaign began with the display of an intense interest in her life—
scenes that image you, that
sumptuous weather. \ constant phone calls, flowers, gifts, all to keep him in her mind. He set up
Drowned suns that the fortune-teller to plant the seed. When she began to fall for him, he in-
glimmer there \ Through troduced her to his friends, knowing she would feel alienated among them,
cloud-dishevelled air \
and therefore dependent on him. Her dependence was heightened by the
Move me with such a
mystery as appears \ trip to Spain, where she was on unfamiliar territory, besieged by reporters,
Within those other skies \ and forced to cling to him for help. He slowly came to dominate her
Of your treacherous eyes \
thoughts. Everywhere she turned, there he was. Finally she succumbed, out
When I behold them
shining through their tears. of weakness and the boost to her vanity that his attention represented. Un-
\ There, there is nothing der his spell, she forgot about his horrid reputation, relinquishing the suspi-
else but grace and measure,
cions that were the only thing protecting her from him.
\ Richness, quietness, and
pleasure. . . . \ See, It was not Aly Khan's wealth or looks that made him a great seducer.

[PAGE 343]
Isolate the Victim • 315
He was not in fact very handsome, and his wealth was more than offset by sheltered from the swells \
his bad reputation. His success was strategic: he isolated his victims, work- There in the still canals \
Those drowsy ships that
ing so slowly and subtly that they did not notice it. The intensity of his at-
dream of sailing forth; \ It
tention made a woman feel that in his eyes, at that moment, she was the is to satisfy \ Your least
only woman in the world. This isolation was experienced as pleasure; the desire, they ply \ Hither
through all the waters of
woman did not notice her growing dependence, how the way he filled up
the earth. \ The sun at
her mind with his attention slowly isolated her from her friends and her
close of day \ Clothes the
milieu. Her natural suspicions of the man were drowned out by his intoxi- fields of hay, \ Then the
cating effect on her ego. Aly Khan almost always capped off his seductions canals, at last the town
entire \ In hyacinth and
by taking the woman to some enchanted place on the globe—a place that
gold: \ Slowly the land is
he knew well, but where the woman felt lost. rolled \ Sleepward under a
Do not give your targets the time or space to worry about, suspect, or sea of gentle fire. \ There,
there is nothing else but
resist you. Flood them with the kind of attention that crowds out all other
grace and measure, \
thoughts, concerns, and problems. Remember—people secretly yearn to be Richness, quietness, and
led astray by someone who knows where they are going. It can be a plea- pleasure.
sure to let go, and even to feel isolated and weak, if the seduction is done —CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
slowly and gracefully. "INVITATION TO THE VOYAGE,"
THE FLOWERS OF EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
Put them in a spot where they have no place to go, and WILBUR
they will die before fleeing.
—SUN-TZU
Keys to Seduction
The people around you may seem strong, and more or less in control of
their lives, but that is merely a facade. Underneath, people are more
brittle than they let on. What lets them seem strong is the series of nests
and safety nets they envelop themselves in—their friends, their families,
their daily routines, which give them a feeling of continuity, safety, and
control. Suddenly pull the rug out from under them, drop them alone into
some foreign place where the familiar signposts are gone or scrambled, and
you will see a very different person.
A target who is strong and settled is hard to seduce. But even the stron-
gest people can be made vulnerable if you can isolate them from their nests
and safety nets. Block out their friends and family with your constant pres-
ence, alienate them from the world they are used to, and take them to
places they do not know. Get them to spend time in your environment. De-
liberately disturb their habits, get them to do things they have never done.
They will grow emotional, making it easier to lead them astray. Disguise all
this in the form of a pleasurable experience, and your targets will wake up
one day distanced from everything that normally comforts them. Then
they will turn to you for help, like a child crying out for its mother when
the lights are turned out. In seduction, as in warfare, the isolated target is
weak and vulnerable.
In Samuel Richardson's Clarissa, written in 1748, the rake Lovelace is

[PAGE 344]
316 • The Art of Seduction
attempting to seduce the novel's beautiful heroine. Clarissa is young, virtu-
ous, and very much protected by her family. But Lovelace is a conniving se-
ducer. First he courts Clarissa's sister, Arabella. A match between them
seems likely. Then he suddenly switches attention to Clarissa, playing on
sibling rivalry to make Arabella furious. Their brother, James, is angered by
Lovelace's change in sentiments; he fights with Lovelace and is wounded.
The whole family is in an uproar, united against Lovelace, who, however,
manages to smuggle letters to Clarissa, and to visit her when she is at the
house of a friend. The family finds out, and accuses her of disloyalty.
Clarissa is innocent; she has not encouraged Lovelace's letters or visits. But
now her parents are determined to marry her off, to a rich older man.
Alone in the world, about to be married to a man she finds repulsive, she
turns to Lovelace as the only one who can save her from this mess. Eventu-
ally he rescues her by getting her to London, where she can escape this
dreaded marriage, but where she is also hopelessly isolated. In these cir-
cumstances her feelings toward him soften. All of this has been masterfully
orchestrated by Lovelace himself—the turmoil within the family, Clarissa's
eventual alienation from them, the whole scenario.
Your worst enemies in a seduction are often your targets' family and
friends. They are outside your circle and immune to your charms; they may
provide a voice of reason to the seduced. You must work silently and subtly
to alienate the target from them. Insinuate that they are jealous of your tar-
get's good fortune in finding you, or that they are parental figures who have
lost a taste for adventure. The latter argument is extremely effective with
young people, whose identities are in flux and who are more than ready to
rebel against any authority figure, particularly their parents. You represent
excitement and life; the friends and parents represent habit and boredom.
In Shakespeare's The Tragedy of King Richard III, Richard, when still the
Duke of Gloucester, has murdered King Henry VI and his son, Prince Ed-
ward. Shortly thereafter he accosts Lady Anne, Prince Edward's widow,
who knows what he has done to the two men closest to her, and who hates
him as much as a woman can hate. Yet Richard attempts to seduce her. His
method is simple: he tells her that what he did, he did because of his love
for her. He wanted there to be no one in her life but him. His feelings were
so strong he was driven to murder. Of course Lady Anne not only resists
this line of reasoning, she abhors him. But he persists. Anne is at a moment
of extreme vulnerability—alone in the world, with no one to support her,
at the height of grief. Incredibly, his words begin to have an effect.
Murder is not a seductive tactic, but the seducer does enact a kind of
killing—a psychological one. Our past attachments are a barrier to the pres-
ent. Even people we have left behind can continue to have a hold on us. As
a seducer you will be held up to the past, compared to previous suitors,
perhaps found inferior. Do not let it get to that point. Crowd out the past with
your attentions in the present. If necessary, find ways to disparage their pre-
vious lovers—subtly or not so subtly, depending on the situation. Even go
so far as to open old wounds, making them feel old pain and seeing by con-

[PAGE 345]
Isolate the Victim • 317
trast how much better the present is. The more you can isolate them from
their past, the deeper they will sink with you into the present.
The principle of isolation can be taken literally by whisking the target
off to an exotic locale. This was Aly Khan's method; a secluded island
worked best, and indeed islands, cut off from the rest of the world, have al-
ways been associated with the pursuit of sensual pleasures. The Roman
Emperor Tiberius descended into debauchery once he made his home on
the island of Capri. The danger of travel is that your targets are intimately
exposed to you—it is hard to maintain an air of mystery. But if you take
them to a place alluring enough to distract them, you will prevent them
from focusing on anything banal in your character. Cleopatra lured Julius
Caesar into taking a voyage down the Nile. Moving deeper into Egypt, he
was further isolated from Rome, and Cleopatra was all the more seductive.
The early-twentieth-century lesbian seductress Natalie Barney had an on-
again-off-again affair with the poet Renée Vivien; to regain her affections,
she took Renée on a trip to the island of Lesbos, a place Natalie had visited
many times. In doing so she not only isolated Renée but disarmed and dis-
tracted her with the associations of the place, the home of the legendary
lesbian poet Sappho. Vivien even began to imagine that Natalie was Sap-
pho herself. Do not take the target just anywhere; pick the place that will
have the most effective associations.
The seductive power of isolation goes beyond the sexual realm. When
new adherents joined Mahatma Gandhi's circle of devoted followers, they
were encouraged to cut off their ties with the past—with their family and
friends. This kind of renunciation has been a requirement of many reli-
gious sects over the centuries. People who isolate themselves in this way are
much more vulnerable to influence and persuasion. A charismatic politi-
cian feeds off and even encourages people's feelings of alienation. John F.
Kennedy did this to great effect when he subtly disparaged the Eisenhower
years; the comfort of the 1950s, he implied, compromised American ideals.
He invited Americans to join him in a new life, on a "New Frontier," full
of danger and excitement. It was an extremely seductive lure, particularly
for the young, who were Kennedy's most enthusiastic supporters.
Finally, at some point in the seduction there must be a hint of danger in
the mix. Your targets should feel that they are gaining a great adventure in
following you, but are also losing something—a part of their past, their
cherished comfort. Actively encourage these ambivalent feelings. An ele-
ment of fear is the proper spice; although too much fear is debilitating, in
small doses it makes us feel alive. Like diving out of an airplane, it is excit-
ing, a thrill, at the same time that it is a little frightening. And the only per-
son there to break the fall, or catch them, is you.

[PAGE 346]
318 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Pied Piper. A jolly fellow in his red and yellow cloak,
he lures the children from their homes with the delightful sounds of his
flute. Enchanted, they do not notice how far they are walking, how
they are leaving their families behind. They do not even notice the cave
he eventually leads them into, and which closes upon them forever.
Reversal
The risks of this strategy are simple: isolate someone too quickly and
you will induce a sense of panic that may end up in the target's taking
flight. The isolation you bring must be gradual, and disguised as pleasure—
the pleasure of knowing you, leaving the world behind. In any case, some
people are too fragile to be cut off from their base of support. The great
modern courtesan Pamela Harriman had a solution to this problem: she
isolated her victims from their families, their former or present wives, and
in place of those old connections she quickly set up new comforts for her
lovers. She overwhelmed them with attention, attending to their every
need. In the case of Averill Harriman, the billionaire who eventually mar-
ried her, she literally established a new home for him, one that had no asso-
ciations with the past and was full of the pleasures of the present. It is
unwise to keep the seduced dangling in midair for too long, with nothing
familiar or comforting in sight. Instead, replace the familiar things you have
cut them off from with a new home, a new series of comforts.

[PAGE 347]
Phase Three
The Precipice—
Deepening the Effect Through
Extreme Measures
The goal in this phase is to make everything deeper—the effect you have
on their mind, feelings of love and attachment, tension within your vic-
tims. With your hooks deep into them, you can then push them back
and forth, between hope and despair, until they weaken and snap. Show-
ing how far you are willing to go for your victims, doing some noble or
chivalrous deed (16: Prove yourself) will create a powerful jolt, spark an
intensely positive reaction. Everyone has scars, repressed desires, and un-
finished business from childhood. Bring these desires and wounds to the
surface, make your victims feel they are getting what they never got as a
child and you will penetrate deep into their psyche, stir uncontrollable
emotions (17: Effect a regression). Now you can take your victims past
their limits, getting them to act out their dark sides, adding a sense of
danger to your seduction (18: Stir up the transgressive and taboo).
You need to deepen the spell, and nothing will more confuse and enchant
your victims than giving your seduction a spiritual veneer. It is not lust
that motivates you, but destiny, divine thoughts and everything elevated
(19: Use spiritual lures). The erotic lurks beneath the spiritual. Now
your victims have been properly set up. By deliberately hurting them,
instilling fears and anxieties, you will lead them to the edge of the
precipice from which it will be easy to push and make them fall (20: Mix
pleasure with pain). They feel great tension and are yearning for relief.

[PAGE 348]


[PAGE 349]
Prove Yourself
Most
people want to be seduced. If
they resist your efforts, it is proba-
bly because you have not gone far
enough to allay their doubts—about
your motives, the depth of your feel-
ings, and so on. One well-timed ac-
tion that shows how far you are
willing to go to win them over will
dispel their doubts. Do not worry
about looking foolish or making a
mistake—any kind of deed that is
self-sacrificing and for your targets'
sake will so overwhelm their emo-
tions, they won't notice anything else.
Never appear discouraged by people's
resistance, or complain. Instead, meet
the challenge by doing something ex-
treme or chivalrous. Conversely, spur
others to prove themselves by making
yourself hard to reach, unattain-
able, worth fighting over.

[PAGE 350]


[PAGE 351]
Seductive Evidence
Anyone can talk big, say lofty things about their feelings, insist on how
much they care for us, and also for all oppressed peoples in the far
reaches of the planet. But if they never behave in a way that will back up
their words, we begin to doubt their sincerity—perhaps we are dealing
with a charlatan, or a hypocrite or a coward. Flattery and fine words can
only go so far. A time will eventually arrive when you will have to show
your victim some evidence, to match your words with deeds. Love is a species of warfare.
Slack troopers, go
This kind of evidence has two functions. First, it allays any lingering
elsewhere! \ It takes more
doubts about you. Second, an action that reveals some positive quality in than cowards to guard \
you is immensely seductive in and of itself. Brave or selfless deeds create a These standards. Night-
duty in winter, long-route
powerful and positive emotional reaction. Don't worry, your deeds do not
marches, every \ Hardship,
have to be so brave and selfless that you lose everything in the process. The all forms of suffering: these
appearance alone of nobility will often suffice. In fact, in a world where await \ The recruit who
expects a soft option.
people overanalyze and talk too much, any kind of action has a bracing, se-
You'll often be out in \
ductive effect.
Cloudbursts, and bivouac
It is normal in the course of a seduction to encounter resistance. The on the bare \ Ground. . . .
more obstacles you overcome, of course, the greater the pleasure that awaits Is lasting \ Love your
ambition? Then put away
you, but many a seduction fails because the seducer does not correctly read
all pride. \ The simple,
the resistances of the target. More often than not, you give up too easily. straightforward way in may
First, understand a primary law of seduction: resistance is a sign that the be denied you, \ Doors
bolted, shut in your face —
other person's emotions are engaged in the process. The only person you
\ So be ready to slip down
cannot seduce is somebody distant and cold. Resistance is emotional, and from the roof through a
can be transformed into its opposite, much as, in jujitsu, the physical resis- lightwell, \ Or sneak in by
an upper-floor window.
tance of an opponent can be used to make him fall. If people resist you be-
She'll be glad \ To know
cause they don't trust you, an apparently selfless deed, showing how far you you 're risking your neck,
are willing to go to prove yourself, is a powerful remedy. If they resist be- and for her sake: that will
offer \ Any mistress sure
cause they are virtuous, or because they are loyal to someone else, all the
proof of your love.
better—virtue and repressed desire are easily overcome by action. As the
great seductress Natalie Barney once wrote, "Most virtue is a demand for —OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
greater seduction."
There are two ways to prove yourself. First, the spontaneous action: a
situation arises in which the target needs help, a problem needs solving, or,
The man says: " . . . A
simply, he or she needs a favor. You cannot foresee these situations, but you fruit picked from one's own
must be ready for them, for they can spring up at any time. Impress the tar- orchard ought to taste
sweeter than one obtained
get by going further than really necessary—sacrificing more money, more
from a stranger's tree, and
time, more effort than they had expected. Your target will often use these what has been attained by
323

[PAGE 352]
324 • The Art of Seduction
greater effort is cherished moments, or even manufacture them, as a kind of test: will you retreat? Or
more dearly than what is
will you rise to the occasion? You cannot hesitate or flinch, even for a mo-
gained with little trouble.
ment, or all is lost. If necessary, make the deed seem to have cost you more
As the proverb says:
'Prizes great cannot be than it has, never with words, but indirectly—exhausted looks, reports
won unless some heavy spread through a third party, whatever it takes.
labor's done.'" • The
The second way to prove yourself is the brave deed that you plan and
woman says: "If no great
prizes can be won unless execute in advance, on your own and at the right moment—preferably
some heavy labor's done, some way into the seduction, when any doubts the victim still has about
you must suffer the
you are more dangerous than earlier on. Choose a dramatic, difficult action
exhaustion of many toils to
be able to attain the favors that reveals the painful time and effort involved. Danger can be extremely
you seek, since what you seductive. Cleverly lead your victim into a crisis, a moment of danger, or
ask for is a greater prize."
indirectly put them in an uncomfortable position, and you can play the res-
• The man says: "I give
cuer, the gallant knight. The powerful feelings and emotions this elicits can
you all the thanks that I
can express for so sagely easily be redirected into love.
promising me your love
when I have performed
great toils. God forbid that Some Examples
I or any other could win
the love of so worthy a
woman without first 1. In France in the 1640s, Marion de l'Orme was the courtesan men lusted
attaining it by many
after the most. Renowned for her beauty, she had been the mistress of Car-
labors."
dinal Richelieu, among other notable political and military figures. To win
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS
her bed was a sign of achievement.
ON LOVE, TRANSLATED BY
P. G.WALSH For weeks the rake Count Grammont had wooed de l'Orme, and fi-
nally she had given him an appointment for a particular evening. The count
prepared himself for a delightful encounter, but on the day of the appoint-
One day, [Saint-Preuil] ment he received a letter from her in which she expressed, in polite and
pleaded more than usual tender terms, her terrible regrets—she had the most awful headache, and
that [Madame de la
would have to stay in bed that evening. Their appointment would have to
Maisonfort] grant him the
ultimate favors a woman be postponed. The count felt certain he was being pushed to the side for
could offer, and he went someone else, for de l'Orme was as capricious as she was beautiful.
beyond just words in his
Grammont did not hesitate. At nightfall he rode to the Marais, where
pleading. Madame, saying
he had gone way too far, de l'Orme lived, and scouted the area. In a square near her home he spot-
ordered him to never ever ted a man approaching on foot. Recognizing the Duc de Brissac, he imme-
appear before her again.
diately knew that this man was to supplant him in the courtesan's bed.
He left her room. Only an
hour later, the lady was Brissac seemed unhappy to see the count, and so Grammont approached
taking her customary walk him hurriedly and said, "Brissac, my friend, you must do me a service of
along one of those beautiful
the greatest importance: I have an appointment, for the first time, with a
canals at Bagnolet, when
girl who lives near this place; and as this visit is only to concert measures, I
Saint-Preuil leapt out from
behind a hedge, totally shall make but a very short stay. Be so kind as to lend me your cloak, and
naked, and standing before walk my horse a little, until I return; but above all, do not go far from this
his mistress in this state, he
place." Without waiting for an answer, Grammont took the duke's cloak
cried out, "For the last
time, Madame— and handed him the bridle of his horse. Looking back, he saw that Brissac
Goodbye!" Thereupon, he was watching him, so he pretended to enter a house, slipped out through
threw himself into the
the back, circled around, and reached de l'Orme's house without being
canal, head first. The lady,
terrified by such a sight, seen.

[PAGE 353]
Prove Yourself • 325
Grammont knocked at the door, and a servant, mistaking him for the began to cry and to run in
duke, let him in. He headed straight for the lady's chamber, where he found the direction of her house,
her lying on a couch, in a sheer gown. He threw off Brissac's cloak and she where upon arriving, she
fainted. As soon as she
gasped in fright. "What is the matter, my fair one?" he asked. "Your
could speak, she ordered
headache, to all appearance, is gone?" She seemed put out, exclaimed she that someone go and see
still had the headache, and insisted that he leave. It was up to her, she said, what had happened to
Saint-Preuil, who in truth
to make or break appointments. "Madam," Grammont said calmly, "I know
had not stayed very long in
what perplexes you: you are afraid lest Brissac should meet me here; but the canal, and having
you may make yourself easy on that account." He then opened the window quickly put his clothes back
on, hurried to Paris where
and revealed Brissac out in the square, dutifully walking back and forth
he hid himself for several
with a horse, like a common stable boy. He looked ridiculous; de l'Orme days. Meanwhile, the
burst out laughing, threw her arms around the count, and exclaimed, "My rumor spread that he had
died. Madame de la
dear Chevalier, I can hold out no longer; you are too amiable and too ec-
Maisnnfort was deeply
centric not to be pardoned." He told her the whole story, and she promised
moved by the extreme
that the duke could exercise horses all night, but she would not let him in. measures he had adopted
They made an appointment for the following evening. Outside, the count to prove his sentiments.
This act of his appeared to
returned the cloak, apologized for taking so long, and thanked the duke.
her to be a sign of an
Brissac was most gracious, even holding Grammont's horse for him to extraordinary love; and
mount, and waving goodbye as he rode off. having perhaps noticed
some charms in his naked
presence that she had not
seen fully clothed, she
Interpretation. Count Grammont knew that most would-be seducers give deeply regretted her cruelty,
and publicly stated her
up too easily, mistaking capriciousness or apparent coolness as a sign of a
feeling of loss. Word of this
genuine lack of interest. In fact it can mean many things: perhaps the per- reached Saint-Preuil, and
son is testing you, wondering if you are really serious. Prickly behavior is he immediately resurrected
himself and did not lose
exactly this kind of test—if you give up at the first sign of difficulty, you
time in taking advantage of
obviously do not want them that much. Or it could be that they themselves
such a favorable feeling in
are uncertain about you, or are trying to choose between you and someone his mistress.
else. In any event, it is absurd to give up. One incontrovertible demonstra-
—COUNT BUSSY-RABUTIN,
tion of how far you are willing to go will overwhelm all doubts. It will also HISTOIRES AMOUREUSES DES
defeat your rivals, since most people are timid, worried about making fools GAULES
of themselves, and so rarely risk anything.
When dealing with difficult or resistant targets, it is usually best to im-
To become a lady's
provise, the way Grammont did. If your action seems sudden and a sur-
vassal . . . the troubadour
prise, it will make them more emotional, loosen them up. A little
was expected to pass
roundabout accumulation of information—a little spying—is always a through four stages, i.e.:
good idea. Most important is the spirit in which you enact your proof. If aspirant, supplicant,
postulant, and lover.
you are lighthearted and playful, if you make the target laugh, proving
When he had attained the
yourself and amusing them at the same time, it won't matter if you mess last stage of amorous
up, or if they see you have employed a little trickery. They will give in to initiation he made a vow of
fidelity and this homage
the pleasant mood you have created. Notice that the count never whined
was sealed by a kiss. • In
or grew angry or defensive. All he had to do was pull back the curtain and this idealistic form of
reveal the duke walking his horse, melting de l'Orme's resistance with courtly love reserved for the
aristocratic elite of chivalry,
laughter. In one well-executed act, he showed what he would do for a
the phenomenon of love
night of her favors.
was considered to be a state

[PAGE 354]
326 • The Art of Seduction
of grace, while the 2. Pauline Bonaparte, the sister of Napoleon, had so many affairs with dif-
initiation that followed, ferent men over the years that doctors were afraid for her health. She could
and the final sealing of the
not stay with one man for more than a few weeks; novelty was her only
pact—or equivalent of
pleasure. After Napoleon married her off to Prince Camillo Borghese, in
the knightly accolade—
were linked with the rest of 1803, her affairs only multiplied. And so, when she met the dashing Major
a nobleman's training and Jules de Canouville, in 1810, everyone assumed the affair would last no
valorous exploits. The
longer than the others. Of course the major was a decorated soldier, well
hallmarks of a true lover
and of a perfect knight educated, an accomplished dancer, and one of the most handsome men in
were almost identical. The the army. But Pauline, thirty years old at the time, had had affairs with
lover was bound to serve
dozens of men who could have matched that resume.
and obey his lady as a
knight served his lord. In A few days after the affair began, the imperial dentist arrived chez
both cases the pledge was of Pauline. A toothache had been causing her sleepless nights, and the dentist
a sacred nature.
saw he would have to pull out the bad tooth right then and there. No
—NINA EPTON, painkillers were used at the time, and as the man began to take out his vari-
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
ous instruments, Pauline grew terrified. Despite the pain of the tooth, she
changed her mind and refused to have it pulled.
Major Canouville was lounging on a couch in a silken robe. Taking all
In one of the goodly towns
this in, he tried to encourage her to have it done: "A moment or two of
of the kingdom of France
there dwelt a nobleman of pain and it's over forever. ... A child could go through with it and not ut-
good birth, who attended ter a sound." "I'd like to see you do it," she said. Canouville got up, went
the schools that he might
over to the dentist, chose a tooth in the back of his own mouth, and or-
learn how virtue and honor
are to be acquired among dered that it be pulled. A perfectly good tooth was extracted, and Canou-
virtuous men. But ville barely batted an eyelash. After this, not only did Pauline let the dentist
although he was so
do his job, her opinion of Canouville changed: no man had ever done any-
accomplished that at the
age of seventeen or eighteen thing like this for her before.
years he was, as it were, The affair had been going to last but a few weeks; now it stretched on.
both precept and example
Napoleon was not pleased. Pauline was a married woman; short affairs
to others, Love failed not to
were allowed, but a deep attachment was embarrassing. He sent Canouville
add his lesson to the rest;
and, that he might be the to Spain, to deliver a message to a general there. The mission would take
better harkened to and weeks, and in the meantime Pauline would find someone else.
received, concealed himself
Canouville, though, was not your average lover. Riding day and night,
in the face and the eyes of
the fairest lady in the without stopping to eat or sleep, he arrived in Salamanca within a few days.
whole country round, who There he found that he could proceed no farther, since communications
had come to the city in
had been cut off, and so, without waiting for further orders, he rode back
order to advance a suit-at-
law. But before Love to Paris, without an escort, through enemy territory. He could meet with
sought to vanquish the Pauline only briefly; Napoleon sent him right back to Spain. It was months
gentleman by means of this
before he was finally allowed to return, but when he did, Pauline immedi-
lady's beauty, he had first
ately resumed her affair with him—an unheard-of act of loyalty on her
won her heart by letting
her see the perfections of part. This time Napoleon sent Canouville to Germany and finally to Rus-
this young lord; for in good sia, where he died bravely in battle in 1812. He was the only lover Pauline
looks, grace, sense and
ever waited for, and the only one she ever mourned.
excellence of speech he was
surpassed by none. • You,
who know what speedy
way is made by the fire of
Interpretation. In seduction, the time often comes when the target has be-
love when once it fastens
on the heart and fancy, will gun to fall for you, but suddenly pulls back. Your motives have begun to

[PAGE 355]
Prove Yourself • 327
seem dubious—perhaps all you are after is sexual favors, or power, or readily imagine that
money. Most people are insecure and doubts like these can ruin the seduc- between two subjects so
perfect as these it knew
tive illusion. In the case of Pauline Bonaparte, she was quite accustomed to
little pause until it had
using men for pleasure, and she knew perfectly well that she was being used
them at its will, and had
in turn. She was totally cynical. But people often use cynicism to cover up so filled them with its clear
insecurity. Pauline's secret anxiety was that none of her lovers had ever light, that thought, wish,
and speech were all aflame
really loved her—that all of them to a man had really just wanted sex or
with it. Youth, begetting
political favors from her. When Canouville showed, through concrete ac- fear in the young lord, led
tions, the sacrifices he would make for her—his tooth, his career, his life— him to urge his suit with
all the gentleness
he transformed a deeply selfish woman into a devoted lover. Not that her
imaginable; but she, being
response was completely unselfish: his deeds were a boost to her vanity. If conquered by love, had no
she could inspire these actions from him, she must be worth it. But if he need of force to win her.
Nevertheless, shame, which
was going to appeal to the noble sede of her nature, she had to rise to that
tarries with ladies as long
level as well, and prove herself by remaining loyal to him. as it can, for some time
Making your deed as dashing and chivalrous as possible will elevate the restrained her from
declaring her mind. But at
seduction to a new level, stir up deep emotions, and conceal any ulterior
last the heart's fortress,
motives you may have. The sacrifices you are making must be visible; talk-
which is honor's abode, was
ing about them, or explaining what they have cost you, will seem like brag- shattered in such sort that
ging. Lose sleep, fall ill, lose valuable time, put your career on the line, the poor lady consented to
that which she had never
spend more money than you can afford. You can exaggerate all this for ef-
been minded to refuse. • In
fect, but don't get caught boasting about it or feeling sorry for yourself: order, however, to make
cause yourself pain and let them see it. Since almost everyone else in trial of her lover's patience,
constancy, and love, she
the world seems to have an angle, your noble and selfless deed will be
granted him what he
irresistible. sought on a very hard
condition, assuring him
that if he fulfilled it she
would love him perfectly
3. Throughout the 1890s and into the early twentieth century, Gabriele forever; whereas, if he
D'Annunzio was considered one of Italy's premier novelists and play- failed in it, he would
certainly never win her as
wrights. Yet many Italians could not stand the man. His writing was florid,
long as he lived. And the
and in person he seemed full of himself, overdramatic—riding horses naked
condition was this: she
on the beach, pretending to be a Renaissance man, and more of the kind. would be willing to talk
His novels were often about war, and about the glory of facing and defeat- with him, both being in
bed together, clad in their
ing death—an entertaining subject for someone who had never actually
linen only, but he was to
done so. And so, at the start of World War I, no one was surprised that ask nothinginore from her
D'Annunzio led the call for Italy to side with the Allies and enter the fray. than words and kisses. •
He, thinking there was no
Everywhere you turned, there he was, giving a speech in favor of war—
joy to be compared to that
a campaign that succeeded in 1915, when Italy finally declared war on which she promised him,
Germany and Austria. D'Annunzio's role so far had been completely pre- agreed to the proposal, and
that evening the promise
dictable. But what did surprise the Italian public was what this fifty-two-
was kept; in such wise
year-old man did next: he joined the army. He had never served in the
that, despite all the caresses
military, boats made him seasick, but he could not be dissuaded. Eventually she bestowed on him and
the authorities gave him a post in a cavalry division, hoping to keep him the temptations that beset
him, he would not break
out of combat.
his oath. And albeit his
Italy had little experience in war, and its military was somewhat torment seemed to him no
chaotic. The generals somehow lost track of D'Annunzio—who, in any less than that of Purgatory,

[PAGE 356]
328 • The Art of Seduction
yet was his love so great case, had decided to leave his cavalry division and form units of his own.
and his hope so strong, (He was an artist, after all, and could not be subjected to army discipline.)
sure as he felt of the
Calling himself Commandante, he overcame his habitual seasickness and di-
ceaseless continuance of the
rected a series of daring raids, leading groups of motorboats in the middle
love he had thus painfully
won, that he preserved his of the night into Austrian harbors and firing torpedoes at anchored ships.
patience and rose from He also learned how to fly, and began to lead dangerous sorties. In August
beside her without having
of 1915, he flew over the city of Trieste, then in enemy hands, and dropped
done anything contrary to
her expressed wish. • The Italian flags and thousands of pamphlets containing a message of hope, writ-
lady was, I think, more ten in his inimitable style: "The end of your martyrdom is at hand! The
astonished than pleased by
dawn of your joy is imminent. From the heights of heaven, on the wings of
such virtue; and giving no
heed to the honor, patience, Italy, I throw you this pledge, this message from my heart." He flew at alti-
and faithfulness her lover tudes unheard of at the time, and through thick enemy fire. The Austrians
had shown in the keeping
put a price on his head.
of his oath, she forthwith
On a mission in 1916, D'Annunzio fell against his machine gun, per-
suspected that his love was
not so great as she had manently injuring one eye and seriously damaging the other. Told his fly-
thought, or else that he had ing days were over, he convalesced in his home in Venice. At the time, the
found her less pleasing
most beautiful and fashionable woman in Italy was generally considered to
than he had expected. •
She therefore resolved, be the Countess Morosini, former mistress of the German Kaiser. Her
before keeping her promise, palace was on the Grand Canal, opposite the home of D'Annunzio. Now
to make a further trial of
she found herself besieged by letters and poems from the writer-soldier,
the love he bore her; and to
this end she begged him to mixing details of his flying exploits with declarations of his love. In the
talk to a girl in her service, middle of air raids on Venice, he would cross the canal, barely able to see
who was younger than
out of one eye, to deliver his latest poem. D'Annunzio was much beneath
herself and very beautiful,
Morosini's station, a mere writer, but his willingness to brave anything on
bidding him make love
speeches to her, so that her behalf won her over. The fact that his reckless behavior could get him
those who saw him come so killed any day only hastened the seduction.
often to the house might
D'Annunzio ignored the doctors' advice and returned to flying, leading
think that it was for the
sake of this damsel and not even more daring raids than before. By the end of the war, he was Italy's
of herself • The young most decorated hero. Now, wherever in the nation he appeared, the public
lord, feeling sure that his
filled the piazzas to hear his speeches. After the war, he led a march on
own love was returned in
equal measure, was wholly Fiume, on the Adriatic coast. In the negotiations to settle the war, Italians
obedient to her commands, believed they should have been awarded this city, but the Allies had not
and for love of her
agreed. D'Annunzio's forces took over the city and the poet became a
compelled himself to make
love to the girl; and she, leader, ruling Fiume for more than a year as an autonomous republic. By
finding him so handsome then, everyone had forgotten about his less-than-glorious past as a decadent
and well-spoken, believed
writer. Now he could do no wrong.
his lies more than other
truth, and loved him as
much as though she herself
were greatly loved by him. Interpretation. The appeal of seduction is that of being separated from our
• The mistress finding that
normal routines, experiencing the thrill of the unknown. Death is the ulti-
matters were thus well
advanced, albeit the young mate unknown. In periods of chaos, confusion, and death—the plagues
lord did not cease to claim that swept Europe in the Middle Ages, the Terror of the French Revolu-
her promise, granted him
tion, the air raids on London during World War II—people often let go of
permission to come and see
her at one hour after their usual caution and do things they never would otherwise. They expe-
midnight, saying that after rience a kind of delirium. There is something immensely seductive about

[PAGE 357]
Prove Yourself • 329
danger, about heading into the unknown. Show that you have a reckless having so fully tested the
streak and a daring nature, that you lack the usual fear of death, and you are love and obedience he had
instantly fascinating to the bulk of humanity. shown towards her, it was
but just that he should be
What you are proving in this instance is not how you feel toward an-
rewarded for his long
other person but something about yourself: you are willing to go out on a patience. Of the lover's joy
limb. You are not just another talker and braggart. It is a recipe for instant on hearing this you need
have no doubt, and he
charisma. Any political figure—Churchill, de Gaulle, Kennedy—who has
failed not to arrive at the
proven himself on the battlefield has an unmatchable appeal. Many had appointed time. • But the
thought of D'Annunzio as a foppish womanizer; his experience in the war lady, still wishing to try the
strength of his love, had
gave him a heroic sheen, a Napoleonic aura. In fact he had always been an
said to her beautiful
effective seducer, but now he was even more devilishly appealing. You do damsel—"I am well aware
not necessarily have to risk death, but putting yourself in its vicinity will of the love a certain
nobleman bears to you,
give you a seductive charge. (It is often best to do this some way into the
and I think you are no less
seduction, making it come as a pleasant surprise.) You are willing to enter
in love with him; and I feel
the unknown. No one is more seductive than the person who has had a so much pity for you both,
brush with death. People will be drawn to you; perhaps they are hoping that I have resolved to
afford you time and place
that some of your adventurous spirit will rub off on them.
that you may converse
together at your ease." •
The damsel was so
enchanted that she could
4. According to one version of the Arthurian legend, the great knight Sir
not conceal her longings,
Lancelot once caught a glimpse of Queen Guinevere, King Arthur's wife, but answered that she
and that glimpse was enough—he fell madly in love. And so when word would not fail to be
present. • In obedience,
reached him that Queen Guinevere had been kidnapped by an evil knight,
therefore, to her mistress's
Lancelot did not hesitate—he forgot his other chivalrous tasks and hurried counsel and command, she
in pursuit. His horse collapsed from the chase, so he continued on foot. Fi- undressed herself and lay
down on a handsome bed,
nally it seemed that he was close, but he was exhausted and could go no
in a room the door of
farther. A horse-driven cart passed by; the cart was filled with loathsome-
which the lady left half
looking men shackled together. In those days it was the tradition to place open, whilst within she set
criminals—murderers, traitors, cowards, thieves—in such a cart, which a light so that the maiden's
beauty might be clearly
then passed through every street in town so that people could see it. Once
seen. Then she herself
you had ridden in the cart, you lost all feudal rights for the rest of your life. pretended to go away, but
The cart was such a dreadful symbol that seeing an empty one made you hid herself near to the bed
so carefully that she could
shiver and give the sign of the cross. Even so, Sir Lancelot accosted the
not be seen. • Her poor
cart's driver, a dwarf: "In the name of God, tell me if you've seen my lady lover, thinking to find her
the queen pass by this way?" "If you want to get into this cart I'm driving," according to her promise,
failed not to enter the room
said the dwarf, "by tomorrow you'll know what has become of the queen."
as softly as he could, at the
Then he drove the cart onward. Lancelot hesitated for but two of the
appointed hour; and after
horse's steps, then ran after it and climbed in. he had shut the door and
put off his garments and
Wherever the cart went, townspeople heckled it. They were most curi-
fur shoes, he got into the
ous about the knight among the passengers. What was his crime? How will
bed, where he looked to
he be put to death—flayed? Drowned? Burned upon a fire of thorns? Fi- find what he desired. But
nally the dwarf let him get out, without a word as to the whereabouts of no sooner did he put out
his arms to embrace her
the queen. To make matters worse, no one now would go near or talk to
whom he believed to be his
Lancelot, for he had been in the cart. He kept on chasing the queen, and all mistress, than the poor girl,
along the way he was cursed at, spat upon, challenged by other knights. He believing him entirely her

[PAGE 358]
330 • The Art of Seduction
own, had her arms round had disgraced knighthood by riding in the cart. But no one could stop him
his neck, speaking to him or slow him down, and finally he discovered that the queen's kidnapper was
the while in such loving
the wicked Meleagant. He caught up with Meleagant and the two fought a
words and with so
beautiful a countenance, duel. Still weak from the chase, Lancelot seemed to be near defeat, but
that there is not a hermit when word reached him that the queen was watching the battle, he recov-
so holy but he would have
ered his strength and was on the verge of killing Meleagant when a truce
forgotten his beads for love
was called. Guinevere was handed over to him.
of her. • But when the
gentleman recognized her Lancelot could hardly contain his joy at the thought of finally being in
with both eye and ear, and his lady's presence. But to his shock, she seemed angry, and would not look
found he was not with her
at her rescuer. She told Meleagant's father, "Sire, in truth he has wasted his
for whose sake he had so
greatly suffered, the love efforts. I shall always deny that I feel any gratitude toward him." Lancelot
that had made him get so was mortified but he did not complain. Much later, after undergoing innu-
quickly into the bed, made
merable further trials, she finally relented and they became lovers. One day
him rise from it still more
quickly. And in anger he asked her: when she had been abducted by Meleagant, had she heard the
equally with mistress and story of the cart, and how he had disgraced knighthood? Was that why she
damsel, he said— "Neither
had treated him so coldly that day? The queen replied, "By delaying for
your folly nor the malice of
two steps you showed your unwillingness to climb into it. That, to tell the
her who put you there can
make me other than I am. truth, is why I didn't wish to see you or speak with you."
But do you try to be an
honest woman, for you
shall never lose that good
name through me. " • So Interpretation. The opportunity to do your selfless deed often comes upon
saying he rushed out of the you suddenly. You have to show your worth in an instant, right there on
room in the greatest wrath
the spot. It could be a rescue situation, a gift you could make or a favor you
imaginable, and it was long
before he returned to see his could do, a sudden request to drop everything and come to their aid. What
mistress. However love, matters most is not whether you act rashly, make a mistake, and do some-
which is never without
thing foolish, but that you seem to act on their behalf without thought for
hope, assured him that the
yourself or the consequences.
greater and more manifest
his constancy was proved to At moments like these, hesitation, even for a few seconds, can ruin all
be by all these trials, the the hard work of your seduction, revealing you as self-absorbed, unchival-
longer and more delightful
rous, and cowardly. This, at any rate, is the moral of Chrétien de Troyes's
would be his bliss. • The
lady, who had seen and twelfth-century version of the story of Lancelot. Remember: not only
heard all that passed, was what you do matters, but how you do it. If you are naturally self-absorbed,
so delighted and amazed at
learn to disguise it. React as spontaneously as possible, exaggerating the ef-
beholding the depth and
constancy of his love, that fect by seeming flustered, overexcited, even foolish—love has driven you to
she was impatient to sec that point. If you have to jump into the cart for Guinevere's sake, make sure
him again in order to ask
she sees that you do it without the slightest hesitation.
h is fo rgiven ess for the
sorrow that she had caused
him to endure. And as
soon as she could meet 5. In Rome sometime around 1531, word spread of a sensational young
with him, she failed not to
woman named Tullia d'Aragona. By the standards of the period, Tullia was
address him in such
excellent and pleasant not a classic beauty; she was tall and thin, at a time when the plump and
words, that he not only voluptuous woman was considered the ideal. And she lacked the cloying,
forgot all his troubles but
giggling manner of most young girls who wanted masculine attention. No,
even deemed them very
fortunate, seeing that their her quality was nobler. Her Latin was perfect, she could discuss the latest
issue was to the glory of his literature, she played the lute and sang. In other words, she was a novelty,
constancy and the perfect
and since that was all most men were looking for, they began to visit her in

[PAGE 359]
Prove Yourself • 331
great numbers. She had a lover, a diplomat, and the thought that one man assurance of his love, the
had won her physical favors drove them all mad. Her male visitors began to fruit of which he enjoyed
from that time as fully as
compete for her attention, writing poems in her honor, vying to become
he could desire.
her favorite. None of them succeeded, but they kept on trying.
—QUEEN MARGARET OF
Of course there were some who were offended by her, stating publicly
NAVARRE, THE HEPTAMERON,
that she was no more than a high-class whore. They repeated the rumor QUOTED IN THE VICE
(perhaps true) that she had made older men dance while she played the ANTHOLOGY, EDITED BY
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES
lute, and if their dancing pleased her, they could hold her in their arms. To
Tullia's faithful followers, all of noble birth, this was slander. They wrote a
document that was distributed far and wide: "Our honored mistress, the
A soldier lays siege to
well-born and honorable lady Tullia d'Aragona, doth surpass all ladies of
cities, a lover to girls'
the past, present, or future by her dazzling qualities. . . . Anyone who re- houses, \ The one assaults
fuses to conform to this statement is hereby charged to enter the lists with city gates, the other front
doors. \ Love, like war, is a
one of the undersigned knights, who will convince him in the customary
toss-up. The defeated can
manner." recover, \ While some you
Tullia left Rome in 1535, going first to Venice, where the poet Tasso might think invincible
collapse; \ So if you've got
became her lover, and eventually to Ferrara, which was then perhaps the
love written off as an easy
most civilized court in Italy. And what a sensation she caused there. Her option \ You'd better think
voice, her singing, even her poems were praised far and wide. She opened a twice. Love calls \ For guts
and initiative. Great
literary academy devoted to ideas of freethinking. She called herself a muse
Achilles sulks for Briseis—
and, as in Rome, a group of young men collected around her. They would \ Quick, Trojans, smash
follow her around the city, carving her name in trees, writing sonnets in her through the Argive wall! \
honor, and singing them to anyone who would listen. Hector went into battle
from Andromache's
One young nobleman was driven to distraction by this cult of adora-
embraces \ Helmeted by his
tion: it seemed that everyone loved Tullia but no one received her love in wife. \ Agamemnon
return. Determined to steal her away and marry her, this young man himself, the Supremo, was
struck into raptures \ At
tricked her into allowing him to visit her at night. He proclaimed his undy-
the sight of Cassandra's
ing devotion, showered her with jewels and presents, and asked for her tumbled hair; \ Even Mars
hand. She refused. He pulled out a knife, she still refused, and so he stabbed was caught on the job, felt
the blacksmith's meshes—
himself. He lived, but now Tullia's reputation was even greater than before:
\ Heaven's best scandal in
not even money could buy her favors, or so it seemed. As the years went years. Then take \ My own
by and her beauty faded, some poet or intellectual would always come to case. I was idle, born to
leisure en deshabille, \
her defense and protect her. Few of them ever pondered the reality: that
Mind softened by lazy
Tullia was indeed a courtesan, one of the most popular and well paid in the scribbling in the shade. \
profession. But love for a pretty girl
soon drove the sluggard \
To action, made him join
up. \And just look at me
Interpretation. All of us have defects of some sort. Some of these we are now—fighting fit, dead
born with, and cannot help. Tullia had many such defects. Physically she keen on night exercises: \ If
you want a cure for
was not the Renaissance ideal. Also, her mother had been a courtesan, and
slackness, fall in love!
she was illegitimate. Yet the men who fell under her spell did not care.
—OVID, THE AMORES,
They were too distracted by her image—the image of an elevated woman,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
a woman you would have to fight over to win. Her pose came straight out
of the Middle Ages, the days of knights and troubadours. Then, a woman,
most often married, was able to control the power dynamic between the
sexes by withholding her favors until the knight somehow proved his worth

[PAGE 360]
332 • The Art of Seduction
and the sincerity of his sentiments. He could be sent on a quest, or made
to live among lepers, or compete in a possibly fatal joust for her honor.
And this he had to do without complaint. Although the days of the trouba-
dour are long gone, the pattern remains: a man actually loves to be able to
prove himself, to be challenged, to compete, to undergo tests and trials and
emerge victorious. He has a masochistic streak; a part of him loves pain.
And strangely enough, the more a woman asks for, the worthier she seems.
A woman who is easy to get cannot be worth much.
Make people compete for your attention, make them prove themselves
in some way, and you will find them rising to the challenge. The heat of
seduction is raised by such challenges—show me that you really love me.
When one person (of either sex) rises to the occasion, often the other per-
son is now expected to do the same, and the seduction heightens. By mak-
ing people prove themselves, too, you raise your value and cover up your
defects. Your targets are too busy trying to prove themselves to notice your
blemishes and faults.
Symbol: The Tour-
nament. On the field, with its bright pennants
and caparisoned horses, the lady looks on as knights fight for
her hand. She has heard them declare love on bended knee, their
endless songs and pretty promises. They are all good at such things.
But then the trumpet sounds and the combat begins. In the tourna-
ment there can be no faking or hesitation. The knight she
chooses must have blood on his face, and a few
broken limbs.
Reversal
When trying to prove that you are worthy of your target, remember
that every target sees things differently. A show of physical prowess
will not impress someone who does not value physical prowess; it will just
show that you are after attention, flaunting yourself. Seducers must adapt
their way of proving themselves to the doubts and weaknesses of the se-
duced. For some, fine words are better proofs than daredevil deeds, particu-
larly if they are written down. With these people show your sentiments in
a letter—a different kind of physical proof, and one with more poetic ap-
peal than some showy bit of action. Know your target well, and aim your
seductive evidence at the source of their doubts or resistance.

[PAGE 361]
Effect a Regression
People who
have experienced a certain kind of
pleasure in the past will try to repeat or relive
it. The deepest-rooted and most pleasurable memories
are usually those from earliest childhood, and are often un-
consciously associated with a parental figure. Bring your tar-
gets back to that point by placing yourself in the oedipal triangle
and positioning them as the needy child. Unaware of the cause of
their emotional response, they will fall in love with you. Alterna-
tively, you too can regress, letting them play the role of the pro-
tecting, nursing parent. In either case you are offering the
ultimate fantasy: the chance to have an intimate rela-
tionship with mommy or daddy, son or daughter.

[PAGE 362]


[PAGE 363]
The Erotic Regression
As adults we tend to overvalue our childhood. In their dependency and
powerlessness, children genuinely suffer, yet when we get older we
conveniently forget about that and sentimentalize the supposed paradise we
have left behind. We forget the pain and remember only the pleasure.
Why? Because the responsibilities of adult life are a burden so oppressive at
times that we secretly yearn for the dependency of childhood, for that per-
[In Japan,] much in the
son who looked after our every need, assumed our cares and worries. This traditional way of child-
daydream of ours has a strong erotic component, for the child's feeling of rearing seems to foster
passive dependence. The
being dependent on the parent is charged with sexual undertones. Give
child is rarely left alone,
people a sensation similar to that protected, dependent feeling of childhood day or night, for it usually
and they will project all kinds of fantasies onto you, including feelings of sleeps with the mother.
love or sexual attraction that they will attribute to something else. We When it goes out the child
is not pushed ahead in a
won't admit it, but we long to regress, to shed our adult exterior and vent
pram, to face the world
the childish emotions that linger beneath the surface. alone, but is tightly bound
Early in his career, Sigmund Freud confronted a strange problem: many to the mother's back in a
snug cocoon. When the
of his female patients were falling in love with him. He thought he knew
mother bows, the child does
what was happening: encouraged by Freud, the patient would delve into too, so the social graces are
her childhood, which of course was the source of her illness or neurosis. acquired automatically
while feeling the mother's
She would talk about her relationship with her father, her earliest experi-
heartbeat. Thus emotional
ences of tenderness and love, and also of neglect and abandonment. The security tends to depend
process would stir up powerful emotions and memories. In a way, she almost entirely on the
physical presence of the
would be transported back into her childhood. Intensifying this effect was
mother. • . . . Children
the fact that Freud himself said little and made himself a little cold and dis- learn that a show of
tant, although he seemed to be caring—in other words, quite like the tradi- passive dependence is the
tional father figure. Meanwhile the patient was lying on a couch, in a best way to get favors as
well as affection. There is a
helpless or passive position, so that the situation duplicated the roles of par-
verb for this in Japanese:
ent and child. Eventually she would begin to direct some of the confused amaeru, translated in the
emotions she was dealing with toward Freud himself. Unaware of what was dictionary as "to presume
upon another's love; to
happening, she would relate to him as to her father. She would regress and
play the baby." According
fall in love. Freud called this phenomenon "transference," and it would be- to the psychiatrist Doi
come an active part of his therapy. By getting patients to transfer some of Takeo this is the main key
to understanding the
their repressed feelings onto the therapist, he would bring their problems
Japanese personality. It
into the open, where they could be dealt with on a conscious level. goes on in adult life too:
The transference effect was so potent, though, that Freud was often un- juniors do it to seniors in
companies, or any other
able to move his patients past their infatuation. In fact transference is a
group, women do it to
powerful way of creating an emotional attachment—the goal of any seduc- men, men do it to their
335

[PAGE 364]
336 • The Art of Seduction
mothers, and sometimes tion. The method has infinite applications outside psychoanalysis. To prac-
wives. ...•... A tice it in real life, you need to play the therapist, encouraging people to talk
magazine called Young
about their childhood. Most of us are only too happy to oblige; and our
Lady featured an article
(January 1982) on "how memories are so vivid and emotional that a part of us regresses just in talk-
to make ourselves ing about our early years. Also, in the course of talking, little secrets slip
beautiful." How, in other
out: we reveal all kinds of valuable information about our weaknesses and
words, to attract men. An
our mental makeup, information you must attend to and remember. Do
American or European
magazine would then go not take your targets' words at face value; they will often sugarcoat or over-
on to tell the reader how to dramatize events in childhood. But pay attention to their tone of voice, to
be sexually desirable, no
any nervous tics as they talk, and particularly to anything they do not want
doubt suggesting various
puffs, creams, and sprays. to talk about, anything they deny or that makes them emotional. Many state-
Not so with Young Lady. ments actually mean their opposite: should they say they hated their father,
"The most attractive
for instance, you can be sure that they are hiding a lot of disappointment—
women," it informs us,
"are women full of that they actually loved their father only too much, and perhaps never quite
maternal love. Women got what they wanted from him. Listen closely for recurring themes and
without maternal love are
stories. Most important, learn to analyze emotional responses and see what
the types men never want
lies behind them.
to marry. . . . One has to
look at men through the While they talk, maintain the therapist's pose—attentive but quiet,
eyes of a mother. " making occasional, nonjudgmental comments. Be caring yet distant—
—IAN BURUMA, BEHIND THE somewhat blank, in fact—and they will begin to transfer emotions and pro-
MASK: ON SEXUAL DEMONS,
ject fantasies onto you. With the information you have gathered about their
SACRED MOTHERS,
TRANSVESTITES, GANGSTERS, childhood, and the trusting bond you have forged, you can now begin to
DRIFTERS AND OTHER effect the regression. Perhaps you have uncovered a powerful attachment to
JAPANESE CULTURAL HEROES
a parent, a sibling, a teacher, or any early infatuation, a person who casts a
shadow over their present lives. Knowing what it was about this person that
affected them so powerfully, you can now take over that role. Or perhaps
I have stressed the fact that you have learned of an immense gap in their childhood—a neglectful fa-
the beloved person is a ther, for instance. You act like that parent now, but you replace the original
substitute for the ideal ego.
neglect with the attention and affection that the real parent never supplied.
Two people who love each
other are interchanging Everyone has unfinished business from childhood—disappointments, lacks,
. their ego-ideals. That they painful memories. Finish what is unfinished. Discover what your target
love each other means they
never got and you have the ingredients for a deep-rooted seduction.
love the ideal of themselves
in the other one. There The key is not just to talk about memories—that is weak. What you
would be no love on earth want is to get people to act out in their present old issues from their past,
if this phantom were not
without their being aware of what is happening. The regressions you can
there. We fall in love
because we cannot attain effect fall into four main types.
the image that is our better
self and the best of our self
From this concept it is
The Infantile Regression. The first bond—the bond between a mother
obvious that love itself is
only possible on a certain and her infant—is the most powerful one. Unlike other animals, human ba-
cultural level or after a bies have a long period of helplessness during which they are dependent on
certain phase in the
their mother, creating an attachment that influences the rest of their lives.
development of the
personality has been The key to effecting this regression is to reproduce the sense of uncondi-
reached. The creation of an tional love a mother has for her child. Never judge your targets—let them
ego-ideal itself marks
do whatever they want, including behaving badly; at the same time sur-
human progress. When
people are entirely satisfied round them with loving attention, smother them with comfort. A part of

[PAGE 365]
Effect a Regression • 331
them will regress to those earliest years when their mother took care of with their actual selves,
everything and rarely left them alone. This works on almost everyone, for love is impossible. • The
transfer of the ego-ideal to
unconditional love is the rarest and most treasured form. You do not even
a person is the most
have to tailor your behavior to anything specific in their childhood; most of characteristic trait of love.
us have experienced this kind of attention. Meanwhile, create atmospheres
—THEODOR REIK, OF LOVE
that reinforce the feeling you are generating—warm environments, playful AND LUST
activities, bright, happy colors.
I gave [Sylphide] the eyes
The Oedipal Regression. After the bond between mother and child of one girl in the village,
the fresh complexion of
comes the oedipal triangle of mother, father, and child. This triangle forms
another. The portraits of
during the period of the child's earliest erotic fantasies. A boy wants his great ladies of the time of
mother to himself, a girl does the same with her father, but they never Francis I, Henry IV, and
Louis XIV, hanging in our
quite have it that way, for a parent will always have competing connections
drawing room, lent me
to a spouse or to other adults. Unconditional love has gone; now, inevita-
other features, and I even
bly, the parent must sometimes deny what the child desires. Transport your borrowed beauties from the
victims back to this period. Play a parental role, be loving, but also some- pictures of the Madonna in
the churches. This magic
times scold and instill some discipline. Children actually love a little
creature followed me
discipline—it makes them feel that the adult cares about them. And adult invisibly everywhere, I
children too will be thrilled if you mix your tenderness with a little tough- conversed with her as if
with a real person; she
ness and punishment.
changed her appearance
Unlike infantile regression, oedipal regression must be tailored to your according to the degree of
target. It depends on the information you have gathered. Without knowing my madness; Aphrodite
without a veil, Diana
enough, you might treat a person like a child, scolding them now and then,
shrouded in azure and
only to discover that you are stirring up ugly memories—they had too rose, Thalia in a laughing
much discipline as child. Or you might stir up memories of a parent they mask, Hebe with the goblet
of youth—or she became a
loathed, and they will transfer those feelings to you. Do not go ahead
fairy, giving me dominion
with the regression until you have learned everything you can about their
over nature. . . . The
childhood—what they had too much of, what they lacked, and so on. If delusion lasted two whole
the target was strongly attached to a parent, but that attachment was par- years, in the course of
which my soul attained the
tially negative, the oedipal regression strategy can still be quite effective. We
highest peak of exaltation.
always feel ambivalent toward a parent; even as we love them, we resent
—CHATEAUBRIAND, MEMOIRS
having had to depend on them. Don't worry about stirring up these am-
FROM BEYOND THE GRAVE,
bivalences, which don't keep us from being tied to our parents. Remember QUOTED IN FRIEDRICH SIEBURG,
to include an erotic component in your parental behavior. Now your tar- CHATEAUBRIAND, TRANSLATED
BY VIOLET M. MACDONALD
gets are not only getting their mother or father all to themselves, they are
getting something more, something previously forbidden but now allowed.
The Ego Ideal Regression. As children, we often form an ideal figure out
of our dreams and ambitions. First, that ideal figure is the person we want
to be. We imagine ourselves as brave adventurers, romantic figures. Then,
in our adolescence, we turn our attention to others, often projecting our
ideals onto them. The first boy or girl we fall in love with may seem to
have the ideal qualities we wanted for ourselves, or else may make us feel
that we can play that ideal role in relation to them. Most of us carry these

[PAGE 366]
338 • The Art of Seduction
ideals around with us, buried just below the surface. We are secretly disap-
pointed in how much we have had to compromise, how far below the ideal
we have fallen as we have gotten older. Make your targets feel they are liv-
ing out this youthful ideal, and coming closer to being the person they
wanted to be, and you will effect a different kind of regression, creating
a feeling reminiscent of adolescence. The relationship between you and
the seduced is in this instance more equal than in the previous kinds of
regressions—more like the affection between siblings. In fact the ideal is
often modeled on a brother or sister. To create this effect, strive to repro-
duce the intense, innocent mood of a youthful infatuation.
The Reverse Parental Regression. Here you are the one to regress: you
deliberately play the role of the cute, adorable, yet also sexually charged
child. Older people always find younger people incredibly seductive. In the
presence of youth, they feel a little of their own youth return; but they are
in fact older, and mixed into the invigoration they feel in young people's
company is the pleasure of playing the mother or father to them. If a child
has erotic feelings toward a parent, feelings that are quickly repressed, the
parent must deal with the same problem in reverse. Assume the role of the
child in relation to your targets, however, and they get to act out some of
those repressed erotic sentiments. The strategy may seem to call for a differ-
ence in age, but this is actually not critical. Marilyn Monroe's exaggerated
little-girl qualities worked just fine on men her age. Emphasizing a weak-
ness or vulnerability on your part will give the target a chance to play the
protector.
Some Examples
1. The parents of Victor Hugo separated shortly after the novelist was
born, in 1802. Hugo's mother, Sophie, had been carrying on an affair with
her husband's superior officer, a general. She took the three Hugo boys
away from their father and went off to Paris to raise them on her own.
Now the boys led a tumultuous life, featuring bouts of poverty, frequent
moves, and their mother's continued affair with the general. Of all the
boys, Victor was the most attached to his mother, adopting all her ideas and
pet peeves, particularly her hatred of his father. But with all the turmoil in
his childhood he never felt he got enough love and attention from the
mother he adored. When she died, in 1821, poor and debt-ridden, he was
devastated.
The following year Hugo married his childhood sweetheart, Adèle,
who physically resembled his mother. It was a happy marriage for a while,
but soon Adèle came to resemble his mother in more ways than one: in
1832, he discovered that she was having an affair with the French literary
critic Sainte-Beuve, who also happened to be Hugo's best friend at the

[PAGE 367]
Effect a Regression • 339
time. Hugo was a celebrated writer by now, but he was not the calculating
type. He generally wore his heart on his sleeve. Yet he could not confide in
anyone about Adèle's affair; it was too humiliating. His only solution was to
have affairs of his own, with actresses, courtesans, married women. Hugo
had a prodigious appetite, sometimes visiting three different women in the
same day.
Near the end of 1832, production began on one of Hugo's plays, and
he was to supervise the casting. A twenty-six-year-old actress named Juli-
ette Drouet auditioned for one of the smaller roles. Normally quite adroit
with the ladies, Hugo found himself stuttering in Juliette's presence. She
was quite simply the most beautiful woman he had ever seen, and this and
her composed manner intimidated him. Naturally, Juliette won the part.
He found himself thinking about her all the time. She always seemed to be
surrounded by a group of adoring men. Clearly she was not interested in
him, or so he thought. One evening, though, after a performance of the play,
he followed her home, to find that she was neither angry nor surprised—
indeed she invited him up to her apartment. He spent the night, and soon
he was spending almost every night there.
Hugo was happy again. To his delight, Juliette quit her career in the
theater, dropped her former friends, and learned to cook. She had loved
fancy clothes and social affairs; now she became Hugo's secretary, rarely
leaving the apartment in which he had established her and seeming to live
only for his visits. After a while, however, Hugo returned to his old ways
and started to have little affairs on the side. She did not complain—as long
as she remained the one woman he kept returning to. And Hugo had in
fact grown quite dependent on her.
In 1843, Hugo's beloved daughter died in an accident and he sank into
a depression. The only way he knew to get over his grief was to have an af-
fair with someone new. And so, shortly thereafter, he fell in love with a
young married aristocrat named Léonie d'Aunet. He began to see Juliette
less and less. A few years later, Léonie, feeling certain she was the preferred
one, gave him an ultimatum: stop seeing Juliette altogether, or it was over.
Hugo refused. Instead he decided to stage a contest: he would continue to
see both women, and in a few months his heart would tell him which one
he preferred. Léonie was furious, but she had no choice. Her affair with
Hugo had already ruined her marriage and her standing in society; she was
dependent on him. Anyway, how could she lose—she was in the prime of
life, whereas Juliette had gray hair by now. So she pretended to go along
with this contest, but as time went on, she grew increasingly resentful about
it, and complained. Juliette, on the other hand, behaved as if nothing had
changed. Whenever he visited, she treated him as she always had, dropping
everything to comfort and mother him.
The contest lasted several years. In 1851, Hugo was in trouble with
Louis-Napoleon, the cousin of Napoleon Bonaparte and now the president
of France. Hugo had attacked his dictatorial tendencies in the press, bitterly
and perhaps recklessly, for Louis-Napoleon was a vengeful man. Fearing for

[PAGE 368]
340 • The Art of Seduction
the writer's life, Juliette managed to hide him in a friend's house and
arranged for a false passport, a disguise, and safe passage to Brussels. Every-
thing went according to plan; Juliette joined him a few days later, carrying
his most valuable possessions. Clearly her heroic actions had won the con-
test for her.
And yet, after the novelty of Hugo's new life wore off, his affairs re-
sumed. Finally, fearing for his health, and worried that she could no longer
compete with yet another twenty-year-old coquette, Juliette made a calm
but stern demand: no more women or she was leaving him. Taken com-
pletely by surprise, yet certain that she meant every word, Hugo broke
down and sobbed. An old man by now, he got down on his knees and
swore, on the Bible and then on a copy of his famous novel Les Misérables,
that he would stray no more. Until Juliette's death, in 1883, her spell over
him was complete.
Interpretation. Hugo's love life was determined by his relationship with his
mother. He never felt she had loved him enough. Almost all the women he
had affairs with bore a physical resemblance to her; somehow he would
make up for her lack of love for him by sheer volume. When Juliette met
him, she could not have known all this, but she must have sensed two
things: he was extremely disappointed in his wife, and he had never really
grown up. His emotional outbursts and his need for attention made him
more a little boy than a man. She would gain ascendancy over him for the
rest of his life by supplying the one thing he had never had: complete, un-
conditional mother-love.
Juliette never judged Hugo, or criticized him for his naughty ways. She
lavished him with attention; visiting her was like returning to the womb. In
her presence, in fact, he was more a little boy than ever. How could he
refuse her a favor or ever leave her? And when she finally threatened to
leave him, he was reduced to the state of a wailing infant crying for his
mother. In the end she had total power over him.
Unconditional love is rare and hard to find, yet it is what we all crave,
since we either experienced it once or wish we had. You do not have to go
as far as Juliette Drouet; the mere hint of devoted attention, of accepting
your lovers for who they are, of meeting their needs, will place them in an
infantile position. A sense of dependency may frighten them a little, and
they may feel an undercurrent of ambivalence, a need to assert themselves
periodically, as Hugo did through his affairs. But their ties to you will be
strong and they will keep coming back for more, bound by the illusion that
they are recapturing the mother-love they had seemingly lost forever, or
never had.
2. Around the turn of the twentieth century, Professor Mut, a school-
master at a college for young men in a small German town, began to de-

[PAGE 369]
Effect a Regression • 341
velop a keen hatred of his students. Mut was in his late fifties, and had
worked at the same school for many years. He taught Greek and Latin and
was a distinguished classical scholar. He had always felt a need to impose
discipline, but now it was getting ugly: the students were simply not inter-
ested in Homer anymore. They listened to bad music and only liked mod-
ern literature. Although they were rebellious, Mut considered them soft
and undisciplined. He wanted to teach them a lesson and make their lives
miserable; his usual way of dealing with their bouts of rowdiness was sheer
bullying, and most often it worked.
One day a student Mut loathed—a haughty, well-dressed young man
named Lohmann—stood up in class and said, "I can't go on working in this
room, Professor. There is such a smell of mud." Mud was the boys' nick-
name for Professor Mut. The professor seized Lohmann by the arm,
twisted it hard, then banished him from the room. He later noticed that
Lohmann had left his exercise book behind, and thumbing through it he
saw a paragraph about an actress named Rosa Fröhlich. A plot hatched in
Mut's mind: he would catch Lohmann cavorting with this actress, no doubt
a woman of ill repute, and would get the boy kicked out of school.
First he had to find out where she performed. He searched high and
low, finally finding her name up outside a club called the Blue Angel.
He went in. It was a smoke-filled place, full of the working-class types
he looked down on. Rosa was onstage. She was singing a song; the way she
looked everyone in the audience in the eye was rather brazen, but for some
reason Mut found this disarming. He relaxed a little, had some wine. After
her performance he made his way to her dressing room, determined to grill
her about Lohmann. Once there he felt strangely uncomfortable, but he
gathered up his courage, accused her of leading schoolboys astray, and
threatened to get the police to close the place down. Rosa, however, was
not intimidated. She turned all of Mut's sentences around: perhaps he was
the one leading boys astray. Her tone was cajoling and teasing. Yes,
Lohmann had bought her flowers and champagne—so what? No one had
ever talked to Mut this way before; his authoritative tone usually made peo-
ple give way. He should have felt offended: she was low class and a woman,
and he was a schoolmaster, but she was talking to him as if they were
equals. Instead, however, he neither got angry nor left—something com-
pelled him to stay.
Now she was silent. She picked up a stocking and started to darn it, ig-
noring him; his eyes followed her every move, particularly the way she
rubbed her bare knee. Finally he brought up Lohmann again, and the po-
lice. "You've no idea what this life's like," she said. "Everyone who comes
here thinks he's the only pebble on the beach. If you don't give them what
they want they threaten you with the police!" "I certainly regret having
hurt a lady's feelings," he replied sheepishly. As she got up from her chair,
their knees rubbed, and he felt a shiver up his spine. Now she was nice to
him again, and poured him some more wine. She invited him to come
back, then left abruptly to perform another number.

[PAGE 370]
342 • The Art of Seduction
The next day he kept thinking about her words, her looks. Thinking
about her while he was teaching gave him a kind of naughty thrill. That
night he went back to the club, still determined to catch Lohmann in the
act, and once again found himself in Rosa's dressing room, drinking wine
and becoming strangely passive. She asked him to help her get dressed; that
seemed quite an honor and he obliged her. Helping her with her corset and
her makeup, he forgot about Lohmann. He felt he was being initiated into
some new world. She pinched his cheeks and stroked his chin, and occa-
sionally let him glimpse her bare leg as she rolled up a stocking.
Now Professor Mut showed up night after night, helping her dress,
watching her perform, all with a strange kind of pride. He was there so
often that Lohmann and his friends no longer showed up. He had taken
their place—he was the one to bring her flowers, pay for her champagne,
the one to serve her. Yes, an old man like himself had bested the youthful
Lohmann, who thought himself so suave! He liked it when she stroked his
chin, complimented him for doing things right, but he felt even more ex-
cited when she rebuked him, throwing a powder puff in his face or pushing
him off a chair. It meant she liked him. And so, gradually, he began to pay
for all her caprices. It cost him a pretty penny but kept her away from other
men. Eventually he proposed to her. They married, and scandal ensued: he
lost his job, and soon all his money; finally he landed in prison. To the very
end, however, he could never get angry with Rosa. Instead he felt guilty:
he had never done enough for her.
Interpretation. Professor Mut and Rosa Fröhlich are characters in the
novel The Blue Angel, written by Heinrich Mann in 1905, and later made
into a film starring Marlene Dietrich. Rosa's seduction of Mut follows the
classic oedipal regression pattern. First, the woman treats the man the way a
mother would treat a little boy. She scolds him, but the scolding is not
threatening; it is tender, and has a teasing edge. Like a mother, she knows
she is dealing with someone weak, who cannot help his naughty behavior.
She mixes plenty of praise and approval in with her taunts. Once the man
begins to regress, she adds physical excitement—some bodily contact to ex-
cite him, subtle sexual overtones. As a reward for his regression, the man may
get the thrill of finally sleeping with his mother. But there is always an ele-
ment of competition, which the mother figure must heighten. The man
gets to possess her all on his own, something he could not do with father in
the way, but he first has to win her away from others.
The key to this kind of regression is to see and treat your targets as chil-
dren. Nothing about them intimidates you, no matter how much authority
or social standing they have. Your manner makes it clear that you feel you
are the stronger party. To accomplish this it may be helpful to imagine or
visualize them as the children they once were; suddenly, powerful people
do not seem so powerful and threatening when you regress them in your
imagination. Keep in mind that certain types are more vulnerable to an

[PAGE 371]
Effect a Regression • 343
oedipal regression. Look for those who, like Professor Mut, seem outwardly
the most adult—straitlaced, serious, a little full of themselves. They are
struggling to repress their regressive tendencies, overcompensating for their
weaknesses. Often those who seem the most in command of themselves are
the ripest for regression. In fact they are secretly longing for it, because their
power, position, and responsibilities are more a burden than a pleasure.
3. Born in 1768, the French writer François René de Chateaubriand grew
up in a medieval castle in Brittany. The castle was cold and gloomy, as if in-
habited by the ghosts of its past. The family lived there in semiseclusion.
Chateaubriand spent much of his time with his sister Lucile, and his attach-
ment to her was strong enough that rumors of incest made the rounds. But
when he was around fifteen, a new woman named Sylphide entered his
life—a woman he created in his imagination, a composite of all the hero-
ines, goddesses, and courtesans he had read about in books. He was con-
stantly seeing her features in his mind, and hearing her voice. Soon she was
taking walks with him, carrying on conversations. He imagined her inno-
cent and exalted, yet they would sometimes do things that were not so in-
nocent. He carried on this relationship for two whole years, until finally he
left for Paris, and replaced Sylphide with women of flesh and blood.
The French public, weary after the terrors of the 1790s, greeted
Chateaubriand's first books enthusiastically, sensing a new spirit in them.
His novels were full of windswept castles, brooding heroes, and passionate
heroines. Romanticism was in the air. Chateaubriand himself resembled
the characters in his novels, and despite his rather unattractive appearance,
women went wild over him—with him, they could escape their boring
marriages and live out the kind of turbulent romance he wrote about.
Chateaubriand's nickname was the Enchanter, and although he was mar-
ried, and an ardent Catholic, the number of his affairs increased with the
years. But he had a restless nature—he traveled to the Middle East, to the
United States, all over Europe. He could not find what he was looking for
anywhere, and not the right woman either: after the novelty of an affair
wore off, he would leave. By 1807 he had had so many affairs, and still felt
so unsatisfied, that he decided to retire to his country estate, called Vallée
aux Loups. He filled the place with trees from all over the world, trans-
forming the grounds into something out of one of his novels. There he
began to write the memoirs that he envisioned would be his masterpiece.
By 1817, however, Chateaubriand's life had fallen apart. Money prob-
lems had forced him to sell Vallée aux Loups. Almost fifty, he suddenly felt
old, his inspiration dried up. That year he visited the writer Madame de
Staël, who had been ill and was now close to death. He spent several days at
her bedside, along with her closest friend, Juliette Récamier. Madame Ré-
camier's affairs were infamous. She was married to a much older man, but
they had not lived together for some time; she had broken the hearts of the
most illustrious men in Europe, including Prince Metternich, the Duke of

[PAGE 372]
344 • The Art of Seduction
Wellington, and the writer Benjamin Constant. It had also been rumored
that despite all her flirtations she was still a virgin. She was now almost
forty, but she was the type of woman who seems youthful at any age.
Drawn together by their grief over de Staël's death, she and Chateaubriand
became friends. She listened so attentively to him, adopting his moods and
echoing his sentiments, that he felt that he had at last met a woman who
understood him. There was also something rather ethereal about Madame
Récamier. Her walk, her voice, her eyes—more than one man had com-
pared her to some unearthly angel. Chateaubriand soon burned with the
desire to possess her physically.
The year after their friendship began, she had a surprise for him: she
had convinced a friend to purchase Vallée aux Loups. The friend was away
for a few weeks, and she invited Chateaubriand to spend some time with
her at his former estate. He happily accepted. He showed her around, ex-
plaining what each little patch of ground had meant to him, the memories
the place conjured up. He felt youthful feelings welling up inside him, feel-
ings he had forgotten about. He delved further into the past, describing
events in his childhood. At moments, walking with Madame Récamier and
looking into those kind eyes, he felt a shiver of recognition, but he could
not quite identify it. All he knew was that he had to go back to the mem-
oirs that he had laid aside. "I intend to employ the little time that is left to
me in describing my youth," he said, "so long as its essence remains palpa-
ble to me."
It seemed that Madame Récamier returned Chateaubriand's love, but as
usual she struggled to keep it a spiritual affair. The Enchanter, however,
deserved his nickname. His poetry, his air of melancholy, and his persis-
tence finally won the day and she succumbed, perhaps for the first time in
her life. Now, as lovers, they were inseparable. But as always with Cha-
teaubriand, over time one woman was not enough. The restless spirit
returned. He began to have affairs again. Soon he and Récamier stopped
seeing each other.
In 1832, Chateaubriand was traveling through Switzerland. Once again
his life had taken a downward turn; only this time he truly was old, in body
and spirit. In the Alps, strange thoughts of his youth began to assail him,
memories of the castle in Brittany. Word reached him that Madame Ré-
camier was in the area. He had not seen her in years, and he hurried to the
inn where she was staying. She was as kind to him as ever; during the day
they took walks together, and at night they stayed up late, talking.
One day, Chateaubriand told Récamier he had finally decided to finish
his memoirs. And he had a confession to make: he told her the story of
Sylphide, his imaginary lover when he was growing up. He had once
hoped to meet a Sylphide in real life, but the women he had known had
paled in comparison. Over the years he had forgotten about his imaginary
lover, but now he was an old man, and he not only thought of her again,
he could see her face and hear her voice. And with those memories he real-
ized that he had in fact met Sylphide in real life—it was Madame Ré-

[PAGE 373]
Effect a Regression • 345
camier. The face and voice were close. More important, there was the calm
spirit, the innocent, virginal quality. Reading to her the prayer to Sylphide
he had just written, he told her he wanted to be young again, and seeing
her had brought his youth back to him. Reconciled with Madame Ré-
camier, he began to work again on the memoirs, which were eventually
published under the title Memoirs from Beyond the Grave. Most critics agreed
that the book was his masterpiece. The memoirs were dedicated to
Madame Récamier, to whom he remained devoted until his death, in
1848.
Interpretation. All of us carry within us an image of an ideal type of per-
son whom we yearn to meet and love. Most often the type is a composite
made up of bits and pieces of different people from our youth, and even of
characters in books and movies. People who influenced us inordinately—a
teacher for instance—may also figure. The traits have nothing to do with
superficial interests. Rather, they are unconscious, hard to verbalize.
We searched hardest for this ideal type in our adolescence, when we
were more idealistic. Often our first loves have more of these traits than our
subsequent affairs. For Chateaubriand, living with his family in their se-
cluded castle, his first love was his sister Lucile, whom he adored and ideal-
ized. But since love with her was impossible, he created a figure out of his
imagination who had all her positive attributes—nobility of spirit, inno-
cence, courage.
Madame Récamier could not have known about Chateaubriand's ideal
type, but she did know something about him, well before she ever met
him. She had read all of his books, and his characters were highly autobio-
graphical. She knew of his obsession with his lost youth; and everyone
knew of his endless and unsatisfying affairs with women, his hyperrestless
spirit. Madame Récamier knew how to mirror people, entering their spirit,
and one of her first acts was to take Chateaubriand to Vallée aux Loups,
where he felt he had left part of his youth. Alive with memories, he re-
gressed further into his childhood, to the days in the castle. She actively en-
couraged this. Most important, she embodied a spirit that came naturally to
her, but that matched his youthful ideal: innocent, noble, kind. (The fact
that so many men fell in love with her suggests that many men had the
same ideals.) Madame Récamier was Lucile/Sylphide. It took him years to
realize it, but when he did, her spell over him was complete.
It is nearly impossible to embody someone's ideal completely. But if
you come close enough, if you evoke some of that ideal spirit, you can lead
that person into a deep seduction. To effect this regression you must play
the role of the therapist. Get your targets to open up about their past, par-
ticularly their former loves and most particularly their first love. Pay atten-
tion to any expressions of disappointment, how this or that person did not
give them what they wanted. Take them to places that evoke their youth.
In this regression you are creating not so much a relationship of depen-

[PAGE 374]
346 • The Art of Seduction
dency and immaturity but rather the adolescent spirit of a first love. There
is a touch of innocence to the relationship. So much of adult life involves
compromise, conniving, and a certain toughness. Create the ideal atmo-
sphere by keeping such things out, drawing the other person into a kind of
mutual weakness, conjuring a second virginity. There should be a dream-
like quality to the affair, as if the target were reliving that first love but
could not quite believe it. Let all of this unfold slowly, each encounter re-
vealing more ideal qualities. The sense of reliving a past pleasure is simply
impossible to resist.
4. Some time in the summer of 1614, several members of England's upper
nobility, including the Archbishop of Canterbury, met to decide what to
do about the Earl of Somerset, the favorite of King James I, who was
forty-eight at the time. After eight years as the favorite, the young earl had
accumulated such power and wealth, and so many titles, that nothing was
left for anyone else. But how to get rid of this powerful man? For the time
being the conspirators had no answer.
A few weeks later the king was inspecting the royal stables when he
caught sight of a young man who was new to the court: the twenty-two-
year-old George Villiers, a member of the lower nobility. The courtiers
who accompanied the king that day watched the king's eyes following Vil-
liers, and saw with what interest he asked about this young man. Indeed
everyone had to agree that he was a most handsome youth, with the face of
an angel and a charmingly childish manner. When news of the king's inter-
est in Villiers reached the conspirators, they instantly knew they had found
what they had been looking for: a young man who could seduce the king
and supplant the dreaded favorite. Left to nature, though, the seduction
would never happen. They had to help it along. So, without telling Villiers
of their plan, they befriended him.
King James was the son of Mary Queen of Scots. His childhood had
been a nightmare: his father, his mother's favorite, and his own regents had
all been murdered; his mother had first been exiled, later executed. When
James was young, to escape suspicion he played the part of a fool. He hated
the sight of a sword and could not stand the slightest sign of argument.
When his cousin Queen Elizabeth I died in 1603, leaving no heir, he be-
came king of England.
James surrounded himself with bright, happy young men, and seemed
to prefer the company of boys. In 1612, his son, Prince Henry, died. The
king was inconsolable. He needed distraction and good cheer, and his fa-
vorite, the Earl of Somerset, was no longer so young and attractive. The
timing for a seduction was perfect. And so the conspirators went to work
on Villiers, under the guise of trying to help him advance within the court.
They supplied him with a magnificent wardrobe, jewels, a glittering car-
riage, the kind of things the king noticed. They worked on his riding,

[PAGE 375]
Effect a Regression • 347
fencing, tennis, dancing, his skills with birds and dogs. He was instructed in
the art of conversation—how to flatter, tell a joke, sigh at the right mo-
ment. Fortunately Villiers was easy to work with; he had a naturally buoy-
ant manner and nothing seemed to bother him. That same year the
conspirators managed to get him appointed the royal cup-bearer: every
night he poured out the king's wine, so that the king could see him up
close. After a few weeks, the king was in love. The boy seemed to crave at-
tention and tenderness, exactly what he yearned to offer. How wonderful it
would be to mold and educate him. And what a perfect figure he had!
The conspirators convinced Villiers to break off his engagement to a
young lady; the king was single-minded in his affections, and could not
stand competition. Soon James wanted to be around Villiers all the time,
for he had the qualities the king admired: innocence and a lighthearted
spirit. The king appointed Villiers gentleman of the bedchamber, making it
possible for them to be alone together. What particularly charmed James
was that Villiers never asked for anything, which made it all the more de-
lightful to spoil him.
By 1616, Villiers had completely supplanted the former favorite. He
was now the Earl of Buckingham, and a member of the king's privy coun-
cil. To the conspirators' dismay, however, he quickly accumulated even
more privileges than the Earl of Somerset had done. The king would call
him sweetheart in public, fix his doublets, comb his hair. James zealously
protected his favorite, anxious to preserve the young man's innocence. He
tended to the youth's every whim, in effect became his slave. In fact the
king seemed to regress; whenever Steenie, his nickname for Villiers, en-
tered the room, he started to act like a child. The two were inseparable un-
til the king's death, in 1625.
Interpretation. We are most definitely stamped forever by our parents, in
ways we can never fully understand. But the parents are equally influenced
and seduced by the child. They may play the role of the protector, but in
the process they absorb the child's spirit and energy, relive a part of their
own childhood. And just as the child struggles against sexual feelings
toward the parent, the parent must repress comparable erotic feelings that
lie just beneath the tenderness they feel. The best and most insidious way to
seduce people is often to position yourself as the child. Imagining them-
selves stronger, more in control, they will be lured into your web. They will
feel they have nothing to fear. Emphasize your immaturity, your weakness,
and you let them indulge in fantasies of protecting and parenting you—a
strong desire as people get older. What they do not realize is that you are
getting under their skin, insinuating yourself—it is the child who is con-
trolling the adult. Your innocence makes them want to protect you, but it is
also sexually charged. Innocence is highly seductive; some people even long
to play the corrupter of innocence. Stir up their latent sexual feelings and

[PAGE 376]
348 • The Art of Seduction
you can lead them astray with the hope of fulfilling a strong yet repressed
fantasy: sleeping with the child figure. In your presence, too, they will be-
gin to regress as well, infected by your childish, playful spirit.
Most of this came naturally to Villiers, but you will probably have to
use some calculation. Fortunately, all of us have strong childish tendencies
within us that are easy to access and exaggerate. Make your gestures seem
spontaneous and unplanned. Any sexual element of your behavior should
seem innocent, unconscious. Like Villiers, don't push for favors. Parents
prefer to spoil children who don't ask for things but invite them in their
manner. Seeming nonjudgmental and uncritical of those around you will
make everything you do seem more natural and naive. Have a happy, cheer-
ful demeanor, but with a playful edge. Emphasize any weaknesses you
might have, things you cannot control. Remember: most of us remember
our early years fondly, but often, paradoxically, the people with the stron-
gest attachment to those times are the ones who had the most difficult
childhoods. Actually, circumstances kept them from getting to be children,
so they never really grew up, and they long for the paradise they never got
to experience. James I falls into this category. These types are ripe targets
for a reverse regression.
Symbol: The Bed. Lying alone in bed, the child
feels unprotected, afraid, and needy. In a nearby room, there is the parent's bed. It is large and
forbidding, site of things you are not supposed to know about. Give the seduced both feel-
ings—helplessness and transgression—as you lay them into bed and put them to sleep.
Reversal
T
o reverse the strategies of regression, the parties to a seduction would
have to remain adults during the process. This is not only rare, it is not
very pleasurable. Seduction means realizing certain fantasies. Being a ma-
ture and responsible adult is not a fantasy, it is a duty. Furthermore, a person
who remains an adult in relation to you is harder to seduce. In all kinds of
seduction—political, media, personal—the target must regress. The only
danger is that the child, wearying of dependence, turns against the parent
and rebels. You must be prepared for this, and unlike a parent, never take it
personally.

[PAGE 377]
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo
There are always social limits on what one can do.
Some of these, the most elemental taboos, go back centuries;
others are more superficial, simply defining polite and accept-
able behavior. Making your targets feel that you are leading them
past either kind of limit is immensely seductive. People yearn to ex-
plore their dark side. Not everything in romantic love is supposed to
be tender and soft; hint that you have a cruel, even sadistic streak.
You do not respect age differences, marriage vows, family ties. Once
the desire to transgress draws your targets to you, it will be hard for
them to stop. Take them further than they imagined—the shared
feeling of guilt and complicity will create a powerful bond.

[PAGE 378]


[PAGE 379]
The Lost Self
In March of 1812, the twenty-four-year-old George Gordon Byron pub-
lished the first cantos of his poem Childe Harold. The poem was filled
with familiar gothic imagery—a dilapidated abbey, debauchery, travels to
the mysterious East—but what made it different was that the hero of the
poem was also its villain: Harold was a man who led a life of vice, disdain-
ing society's conventions yet somehow going unpunished. Also, the poem
was not set in some faraway land but in present-day England. Childe Harold It is a matter of a certain
hind of feeling: that of
created an instant stir, becoming the talk of London. The first printing
being overwhelmed. There
quickly sold out. Within days a rumor made the rounds: the poem, about a are many who have a great
debauched young nobleman, was in fact autobiographical. fear of bring overwhelmed
by someone; for example,
Now the cream of society clamored to meet Lord Byron, and many of
someone who makes them
them left their calling cards at his London residence. Soon he was showing laugh against their will, or
up at their homes. Strangely enough, he exceeded their expectations. He tickles them to death, or,
worse, tells them things
was devilishly handsome, with curling hair and the face of an angel. His
that they sense to be
black attire set off his pale complexion. He did not talk much, which made
accurate but which they do
an impression of itself, and when he did, his voice was low and hypnotic not quite understand,
and his tone a little disdainful. He had a limp (he was born with a clubfoot), things that go beyond their
prejudices and received
so when an orchestra struck up a waltz (the dance craze of 1812), he would
wisdom, In other words,
stand to the side, a faraway look in his eye. The ladies went wild over By- they do not want to be
ron. Upon meeting him, Lady Roseberry felt her heart beating so violently seduced, since seduction
means confronting people
(a mix of fear and excitement) that she had to walk away. Women fought to
with their limits, limits
be seated next to him, to win his attention, to be seduced by him. Was it that are supposed to be set
true that he was guilty of a secret sin, like the hero of his poem? and stable but that the
seducer suddenly causes to
Lady Caroline Lamb—wife of William Lamb, son of Lord and Lady
waver. Seduction is the
Melbourne—was a glittering young woman on the social scene, but deep desire of being
inside she was unhappy. As a young girl she had dreamt of adventure, ro- overwhelmed, taken
beyond.
mance, travel. Now she was expected to play the role of the polite young
wife, and it did not suit her. Lady Caroline was one of the first to read —DANIEL SIBONY,
L'AMOUR INCONSCIENT
Childe Harold, and something more than its novelty stirred her. When she
saw Lord Byron at a dinner party, surrounded by women, she looked at his
face, then walked away; that night she wrote of him in her journal, "Mad,
Just lately I saw a tight-
bad, and dangerous to know." She added, "That beautiful pale face is my
reined stallion \ Get the bit
fate." in his teeth and bolt \ Like
The next day, to Lady Caroline's surprise, Lord Byron called on her. lightning—yet the minute
he felt the reins slacken, \
Evidently he had seen her walking away from him, and her shyness had in-
Drop loose on his flying
trigued him—he disliked the aggressive women who were constantly at his mane, \ He stopped dead.
351

[PAGE 380]
352 • The Art of Seduction
We eternally chafe at heels, as it seemed he disdained everything, including his success. Soon he
restrictions, covet \ was visiting Lady Caroline daily. He lingered in her boudoir, played with
Whatever's forbidden.
her children, helped her choose her dress for the day. She pressed him to
(Look how a sick man
talk of his life: he described his brutal father, the untimely deaths that
who's told \ No immersion
hangs round the bath- seemed to be a family curse, the crumbling abbey he had inherited, his ad-
house.) \ . . . Desire \ ventures in Turkey and Greece. His life was indeed as gothic as that of
Mounts for what's kept out
Childe Harold.
of reach. A thief's attracted
\ By burglar-proof Within days the two became lovers. Now, though, the tables turned:
premises. How often will Lady Caroline pursued Byron with unladylike aggression. She dressed as a
love \ Thrive on a rival's
page and sneaked into his carriage, wrote him extravagantly emotional let-
approval? It's not your
wife's beauty, but your own ters, flaunted the affair. At last, a chance to play the grand romantic role of
\ Passion for her that gets her girlhood fantasies. Byron began to turn against her. He already loved to
us—she must \ Have
shock; now he confessed to her the nature of the secret sin he had alluded
something, just to have
hooked you. A girl locked to in Childe Harold—his homosexual affairs during his travels. He made
up by her \ Husband's not cruel remarks, grew indifferent. But this only seemed to push her further.
chaste but pursued, her She sent him the customary lock of hair, but from her pubis; she followed
fear's \ A bigger draw than
him in the street, made public scenes—finally her family sent her abroad to
her figure. Illicit passion—
like it \ Or not—is avoid further scandal. After Byron made it clear the affair was over, she de-
sweeter. It only turns me scended into a madness that would last several years.
on \ When the girl says,
In 1813, an old friend of Byron's, James Webster, invited the poet to
"I'm frightened."
stay at his country estate. Webster had a young and beautiful wife, Lady
—OVID, THE AMORES,
Frances, and he knew Byron's reputation as a seducer, but his wife was
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
quiet and chaste—surely she would resist the temptation of a man such as
Byron. To Webster's relief, Byron barely spoke to Frances, who seemed
equally uninterested in him. Yet several days into Byron's stay, she contrived
It is often not possible for
to be alone with him in the billiards room, where she asked him a question:
[women] later on to undo
the connection thus formed how could a woman who liked a man inform him of it when he did not
in their minds between perceive it? Byron scribbled a racy reply on a piece of paper, which made
sensual activities and
her blush as she read it. Soon thereafter he invited the couple to stay with
something forbidden, and
they turn out to be him at his infamous abbey. There, the prim and proper Lady Frances saw
psychically impotent, i.e. him drink wine from a human skull. They stayed up late in one of the
frigid, when at last such
abbey's secret chambers, reading poetry and kissing. With Byron, it seemed,
activities do become
permissible. This is the Lady Frances was only too eager to explore adultery.
source of the desire in so That same year, Lord Byron's half sister Augusta arrived in London to
many women to keep even
get away from her husband, who was having money troubles. Byron had
legitimate relations secret
not seen Augusta for some time. The two were physically similar—the
for a time; and of the
appearance of the capacity same face, the same mannerisms; she was Lord Byron as a woman. And his
for normal sensation in behavior toward her was more than brotherly. He took her to the theater,
others as soon as the
to dances, received her at home, treating her with an intimate spirit that
condition of prohibition is
restored by a secret Augusta soon returned. Indeed the kind and tender attention that Byron
intrigue—untrue to the showered on her soon became physical.
husband, they can keep a
Augusta was a devoted wife with three children, yet she yielded to her
second order of faith with
the lover. • In my opinion half brother's advances. How could she help herself? He stirred up a strange
the necessary condition of passion in her, a stronger passion than she felt for any other man, including
forbiddenness in the erotic
her husband. For Byron, his relationship with Augusta was the ultimate and
life of women holds the
crowning sin of his career. And soon he was writing to his friends, openly
same place as the man's

[PAGE 381]
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 353
confessing it. Indeed he delighted in their shocked responses, and his long need to lower his sexual
narrative poem, The Bride of Abydos, takes brother-sister incest as its theme. object. . . . Women
Rumors began to spread of Byron's relations with Augusta, who was now belonging to the higher
levels of civilization do not
pregnant with his child. Polite society shunned him—but women were
usually transgress the
more drawn to him than before, and his books were more popular than prohibition against sexual
ever. activities during the period
of waiting, and thus they
Annabella Milbanke, Lady Caroline Lamb's cousin, had met Byron in
acquire this close association
those first months of 1812 when he was the toast of London. Annabella between the forbidden and
was sober and down to earth, and her interests were science and religion. the sexual. . . . • The
injurious results of the
But there was something about Byron that attracted her. And the feeling
deprivation of sexual
seemed to be returned: not only did the two become friends, to her bewil- enjoyment at the beginning
derment he showed another kind of interest in her, even at one point manifest themselves in lack
of full satisfaction when
proposing marriage. This was in the midst of the scandal over Byron and
sexual desire is later given
Caroline Lamb, and Annabella did not take the proposal seriously. Over the
free rein in marriage. But,
next few months she followed his career from a distance, and heard the on the other hand,
troubling rumors of incest. Yet in 1813, she wrote her aunt, "I consider his unrestrained sexual liberty
from the beginning leads to
acquaintance as so desirable that I would incur the risk of being called a
no better result. It is easy
Flirt for the sake of enjoying it." Reading his new poems, she wrote that his to show that the value the
"description of Love almost makes me in love." She was developing an ob- mind sets on erotic needs
instantly sinks as soon as
session with Byron, of which word soon reached him. They renewed their
satisfaction becomes readily
friendship, and in 1814 he proposed again; this time she accepted. Byron obtainable. Some obstacle
was a fallen angel and she would be the one to reform him. is necessary to swell the
tide of the libido to its
It did not turn out that way. Byron had hoped that married life would
height; and at all periods of
calm him down, but after the ceremony he realized it was a mistake. He history, wherever natural
told Annabella, "Now you will find that you have married a devil." Within barriers in the way of
satisfaction have not
a few years the marriage fell apart.
sufficed, mankind has
In 1816, Byron left England, never to return. He traveled through Italy erected conventional ones in
for a while; everyone knew his story—the affairs, the incest, the cruelty to order to be able to enjoy
his lovers. But wherever he went, Italian women, particularly married no- love. This is true both of
individuals and of nations.
blewomen, pursued him, making it clear in their own way how prepared
In times during which no
they were to be the next Byronic victim. In truth, the women had become obstacles to sexual
the aggressors. As Byron told the poet Shelley, "No one has been more car- satisfaction existed, such
as, maybe, during the
ried off than poor dear me—I've been ravished more often than anyone
decline of the civilizations
since the Trojan war." of antiquity, love became
worthless, life became
empty, and strong reaction-
formations were necessary
Interpretation. Women of Byron's time were longing to play a different before the indispensable
role than society allowed them. They were supposed to be the decent, emotional value of love
could be recovered.
moralizing force in culture; only men had outlets for their darker impulses.
Underlying the social restrictions on women, perhaps, was a fear of the —SIGMUND FREUD,
"CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
more amoral and unbridled part of the female psyche.
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE,"
Feeling repressed and restless, women of the time devoured gothic nov- SEXUALITY AND THE
els and romances, stories in which women were adventurous, and had the PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY JOAN RIVIÈRE
same capacity for good and evil as men. Books like these helped to trigger a
revolt, with women like Lady Caroline playing out a little of the fantasy life
they had had in their girlhood, where it had to some extent been permit-

[PAGE 382]
354 • The Art of Seduction
This is how Monsieur ted. Byron arrived on the scene at the right time. He became the lightning
Maudair analyzed men's rod for women's unexpressed desires; with him they could go beyond the
attitude toward prostitutes:
limits society had imposed. For some the lure was adultery, for others it was
"Neither the love of a
passionate but well- romantic rebellion, or a chance to become irrational and uncivilized. (The
brought-up mistress, nor desire to reform him merely covered up the truth—the desire to be over-
his marriage to a woman
whelmed by him.) In all cases it was the lure of the forbidden, which in this
whom he respects, can
case was more than merely a superficial temptation: once you became in-
replace the prostitute for the
human animal in those volved with Lord Byron, he took you further than you had imagined or
perverse moments when he wanted, since he recognized no limits. Women did not just fall in love with
covets the pleasure of
him, they let him turn their lives upside down, even ruin them. They pre-
debasing himself without
affecting his social prestige. ferred that fate to the safe confines of marriage.
Nothing can replace this In some ways, the situation of women in the early nineteenth century
bizarre and powerful
has become generalized in the early twenty-first. The outlets for male bad
pleasure of being able to
say everything, do behavior—war, dirty politics, the institution of mistresses and courtesans—
everything, profane and have faded away; today, not just women but men are supposed to be emi-
parody without any fear of
nently civilized and reasonable. And many have a hard time living up to
retribution, remorse, or
responsibility. It is a this. As children we are able to vent the darker side of our characters, a side
complete revolt against that all of us have. But under pressure from society (at first in the form
organized society, his of our parents), we slowly repress the naughty, rebellious, perverse streaks
organized, educated self
in our characters. To get along, we learn to repress our dark sides, which
and especially his
religion." Monsieur become a kind of lost self, a part of our psyche buried beneath our polite
Mauclair hears the call of appearance.
the Devil in this dark
As adults, we secretly want to recapture that lost self—the more adven-
passion poetized by
Baudelaire. "The turous, less respectful, childhood part of us. We are drawn to those who
prostitute represents the live out their lost selves as adults, even if it involves some evil or destruc-
unconscious which enables
tion. Like Byron, you can become the lightning rod for such desires. You
us to put aside our
responsibilities." must learn, however, to keep this potential under control, and to use it
strategically. As the aura of the forbidden around you is drawing targets into
—NINA EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH your web, do not overplay your dangerousness, or they will be frightened
away. Once you feel them falling under your spell, you have freer rein. If
they begin to imitate you, as Lady Caroline imitated Byron, then take it
further—mix in some cruelty, involve them in sin, crime, taboo activity,
Hearts and eye go traveling
along the paths that have whatever it takes. Unleash the lost self within them; the more they act it
always brought them joy; out, the deeper your hold over them. Going halfway will break the spell
and if anyone attempts to
and create self-consciousness. Take it as far as you can.
spoil their game, he only
makes them the more
passionate about it, God Baseness attracts everybody.
knows. . . . so it was with
Tristan and Isolde. As —JOHANN WOLFGANG GOETHE
soon as they were forbidden
their desires, and prevented
from enjoying one another Keys to Seduction
by spies and guards, they
began to suffer intensely.
Desire now seriously Society and culture are based on limits—this kind of behavior is accept-
tormented them by its able, that is not. The limits are fluid and change with time, but there are
magic, many times worse
always limits. The alternative is anarchy, the lawlessness of nature, which we
than before; their need for
one another was more dread. But we are strange animals: the moment any kind of limit is im-

[PAGE 383]
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 355
posed, physically or psychologically, we are instantly curious. A part of us painful and urgent than it
wants to go beyond that limit, to explore what is forbidden. had ever been. • . . .
Women do lots of things
If, as children, we are told not to go past a certain point in the woods,
just because they are
that is precisely where we want to go. But we grow older, and become po- forbidden, which they
lite and deferential; more and more boundaries encumber our lives. Do not would certainly not
confuse politeness with happiness, however. It covers up frustration, un- do if they were not
forbidden. . . . Our Lord
wanted compromise. How can we explore the shadow side of our person-
God gave Eve the freedom
ality without incurring punishment or ostracism? It seeps out in our to do what she would with
dreams. We sometimes wake up with a sense of guilt at the murder, incest, all the fruits, flowers, and
plants there were in
adultery, and mayhem that goes on in our dreams, until we realize no one
Paradise, except for only
needs to know about it but ourselves. But give a person the sense that with one, which he forbade
you they will have a chance to explore the outer reaches of acceptable, po- her to touch on pain of
death. . . . She look the
lite behavior, that with you they can vent some of their closeted person-
fruit and broke God's
ality, and you create the ingredients for a deep and powerful seduction. commandment . . . but it
You will have to go beyond the point of merely teasing them with an is my firm belief now that
Eve would never have done
elusive fantasy. The shock and seductive power will come from the reality
this, if she had not been
of what you are offering them. Like Byron, at a certain point you can even forbidden to.
press it further than they may want to go. If they have followed you merely
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
out of curiosity, they may feel some fear and hesitation, but once they are TRISTAN UND ISOLDE, QUOTED
hooked, they will fond you hard to resist, for it is hard to return to a limit IN ANDREA HOPKINS, THE
BOOK OF COURTLY LOVE
once you have transgressed and gone past it. The human cries out for more,
and does not know when to stop. You will determine for them when it is
time to stop.
One of Monsieur Leopold
The moment people feel that something is prohibited, a part of them
Stern's friends rented a
will want it. That is what makes a married man or woman such a delicious bachelor's pied-à-terre
target—the more someone is prohibited, the greater the desire. George Vil- where he received his wife
as a mistress, served her
liers, the Earl of Buckingham, was the favorite first of King James I, then of
with port and petits-fours
James's son, King Charles I. Nothing was ever denied him. In 1625, on a and "experienced all the
visit to France, he met the beautiful Queen Anne and fell hopelessly in tingling excitement of
adultery." He told Stern
love. What could be more impossible, more out of reach, than the queen of
that it was a delightful
a rival power? He could have had almost any other woman, but the prohib-
sensation to cuckold
ited nature of the queen completely enflamed him, until he embarrassed himself.
himself and his country by trying to kiss her in public.
—NINA EPTON,
Since what is forbidden is desired, somehow you must make yourself LOVE AND THE FRENCH
seem forbidden. The most blatant way to do this is to engage in behavior
that gives you a dark and forbidden aura. Theoretically you are someone to
avoid; in fact you are too seductive to resist. That was the allure of the actor
Errol Flynn, who, like Byron, often found himself the pursued rather than
the pursuer. Flynn was devilishly handsome, but he also had something
else: a definite criminal streak. In his wild youth he engaged in all kinds of
shady activities. In the 1950s he was charged with rape, a permanent stain
on his reputation even though he was acquitted; but his popularity among
women only increased. Play up your dark side and you will have a similar
effect. For your targets to be involved with you means going beyond their
limits, doing something naughty and unacceptable—to society, to their
peers. For many that is reason to bite the bait.

[PAGE 384]
356 • The Art of Seduction
In Junichiro Tanazaki's 1928 novel Quicksand, Sonoko Kakiuchi, the
wife of a respectable lawyer, is bored and decides to take art classes to wile
away the time. There, she finds herself fascinated with a fellow female stu-
dent, the beautiful Mitsuko, who befriends her, then seduces her. Kakiuchi
is forced to tell endless lies to her husband about her involvement with
Mitsuko and their frequent trysts. Mitsuko slowly involves her in all kinds
of nefarious activities, including a love triangle with a bizarre young man.
Each time Kakiuchi is made to explore some forbidden pleasure, Mitsuko
challenges her to go further and further. Kakiuchi hesitates, feels remorse—
she knows she is in the clutches of a devilish young seductress who has
played on her boredom to lead her astray. But in the end, she cannot help
following Mitsuko's lead—each transgressive act makes her want more.
Once your targets are drawn by the lure of the forbidden, dare them to
match you in transgressive behavior. Any kind of challenge is seductive.
Take it slowly heightening the challenge only after they show signs of
yielding to you. Once they are under your spell, they may not even notice
how far out on a limb you have taken them.
The great eighteenth-century rake Duc de Richelieu had a prediliction
for young girls and he would often heighten the seduction by enveloping
them in transgressive behavior, to which the young are particularly suscep-
tible. For instance, he would find a way into the young girl's house and lure
her into her bed; the parents would be just down the hall, adding the
proper spice. Sometimes he would act as if they were about to be discov-
ered, the momentary fright sharpening the overall thrill. In all cases, he
would try to turn the young girl against her parents, ridiculing their reli-
gious zeal or prudery or pious behavior. The duke's stategy was to attack
the values that his targets held dearest—precisely the values that represent a
limit. In a young person, family ties, religious ties, and the like are useful to
the seducer; young people barely need a reason to rebel against them. The
strategy, though, can be applied to a person of any age: for every deeply
held value there is a shadow side, a doubt, a desire to explore what those
values forbid.
In Renaissance Italy, a prostitute would dress as a lady and go to
church. Nothing was more exciting to a man than to exchange glances
with a woman whom he knew to be a whore as he was surrounded by his
wife, family, peers, and church officials. Every religion or value system
creates a dark side, the shadow realm of everything it prohibits. Tease your
targets, get them to flirt with whatever transgresses their family values,
which are often emotional yet superficial, since they are imposed from the
outside.
One of the most seductive men of the twentieth century, Rudolph
Valentino, was known as the Sex Menace. His appeal for women was
twofold: he could be tender and attentive, but he also hinted of cruelty. At
any moment he could become dangerously bold, perhaps even a little vio-
lent. The studios played up this double image as much as possible—when it
was reported that he had been abusive to his wife, for example, they ex-

[PAGE 385]
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 357
ploited the story. A mix of the masculine and the feminine, the violent and
the tender, will always seem transgressive and appealing. Love is supposed
to be tender and delicate, but in fact it can release violent and destructive
emotions; and the possible violence of love, the way it breaks down our
normal reasonableness, is just what attracts us. Approach romance's violent
side by mixing a cruel streak into your tender attentions, particularly in the
latter stages of the seduction, when the target is in your clutches. The
courtesan Lola Montez was known to turn to violence, using a whip now
and then, and Lou Andreas-Salomé could be exceptionally cruel to her
men, playing coquettish games, turning alternately icy and demanding. Her
cruelty only kept her targets coming back for more. A masochistic involve-
ment can represent a great transgressive release.
The more illicit your seduction feels, the more powerful its effect. Give
your targets the feeling that they are committing a kind of crime, a deed
whose guilt they share with you. Create public moments in which the two
of you know something that those around you do not. It could be phrases
and looks that only you recognize, a secret. Byron's seductive appeal to
Lady Frances was connected to the nearness of her husband—in his com-
pany, for example, she had a love letter of Byron's hidden in her bosom. Jo-
hannes, the protagonist of Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, sent a
message to his target, the young Cordelia, in the middle of a dinner party
they were both attending; she could not reveal to the other guests that it
was from him, for then she would have to do some explaining. He might
also say something in public that would have a special meaning for her,
since it referred to something in one of his letters. All of this added spice to
the affair by giving it a feeling of a shared secret, even a guilty crime. It is
critical to play on tensions like these in public, creating a sense of complic-
ity and collusion against the world.
In the Tristan and Isolde legend, the famous lovers reach the heights of
bliss and exhilaration exactly because of the taboos they break. Isolde is en-
gaged to King Mark; she will soon be a married woman. Tristan is a loyal
subject and warrior in the service of King Mark, who is his father's age.
The whole affair has a feeling of stealing away the bride from the father.
Epitomizing the concept of love in the Western world, the legend has
had immense influence over the ages, and a crucial part of it is the idea
that without obstacles, without a feeling of transgression, love is weak and
flavorless.
People may be straining to remove restrictions on private behavior, to
make everything freer, in the world today, but that only makes seduction
more difficult and less exciting. Do what you can to reintroduce a feeling
of transgression and crime, even if it is only psychological or illusory.
There must be obstacles to overcome, social norms to flout, laws to break,
before the seduction can be consummated. It might seem that a permissive
society imposes few limits; find some. There will always be limits, sacred
cows, behavioral standards—endless ammunition for stirring up the trans-
gressive and taboo.

[PAGE 386]
358 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Forest. The children are told not to go into the
forest that lies just beyond the safe confines of their home.
There is no law there, only wilderness, wild animals, and
criminals. But the chance to explore, the alluring dark-
ness, and the fact that it is prohibited are impossi-
ble to resist. And once inside, they want
to go farther and farther.
Reversal
T
he reversal of stirring up taboos would be to stay within the limits
of acceptable behavior. That would make for a very tepid seduc-
tion. Which is not to say that only evil or wild behavior is seductive; good-
ness, kindness, and an aura of spirituality can be tremendously attractive,
since they are rare qualities. But notice that the game is the same. A person
who is kind or good or spiritual within the limits that society prescribes has
a weak appeal. It is those who go to the extreme—the Gandhis, the Krish-
namurtis—who seduce us. They do not merely expound a spiritual life-
style, they do away with all personal material comfort to live out their
ascetic ideals. They too go beyond the limits, transgressing acceptable be-
havior, because societies would find it hard to function if everyone went
to such lengths. In seduction, there is absolutely no power in respecting
boundaries and limits.

[PAGE 387]
Use Spiritual Lures
Every-
one has doubts and in-
securities—about their body,
their self-worth, their sexuality. If
your seduction appeals exclusively to the
physical, you will stir up these doubts and
make your targets self-conscious. Instead, lure
them out of their insecurities by making them fo-
cus on something sublime and spiritual: a religious
experience, a lofty work of art, the occult. Play up
your divine qualities; affect an air of discontent with
worldly things; speak of the stars, destiny, the hidden
threads that unite you and the object of the seduc-
tion. Lost in a spiritual mist, the target will feel
light and uninhibited. Deepen the effect of
your seduction by making its sexual cul-
mination seem like the spiritual
union of two souls.

[PAGE 388]


[PAGE 389]
Object of Worship
Liane de Pougy was the reigning courtesan of 1890s Paris. Slender and
androgynous, she was a novelty, and the wealthiest men in Europe vied
to possess her. By late in the decade, however, she had grown tired of it all.
"What a sterile life," she wrote a friend. "Always the same routine: the Bois,
the races, fittings; and to end an insipid day: dinner!" What wearied the
courtesan most was the constant attention of her male admirers, who
sought to monopolize her physical charms. Ah! always to be able to
freely love the one whom
One spring day in 1899, Liane was riding in an open carriage through
one loves! To spend my life
the Bois de Boulogne. As usual, men tipped their hats at her as she passed at your feet like our last
by. But one of these admirers caught her by surprise: a young woman with days together. To protect
long blond hair, who gave her an intense, worshipful stare. Liane smiled at you against imaginary
satyrs so that I can be the
the woman, who smiled and bowed in return.
only one to throw you on
A few days later Liane began to receive cards and flowers from a this bed of moss. . . .
twenty-three-year-old American named Natalie Barney, who identified We'll find each other again
in Lesbos, and when dusk
herself as the blond admirer in the Bois de Boulogne, and asked for a ren-
falls, we'll go deep in the
dezvous. Liane invited Natalie to visit, but to amuse herself she decided to woods to lose the paths
play a little joke: a friend would take her place, lounging on her bed in the leading to this century. I
want to imagine us in this
dark boudoir, while Liane would hide behind a screen. Natalie arrived at
enchanted island of
the appointed hour. She wore the costume of a Florentine page and carried immortals. I picture it as
a bouquet of flowers. Kneeling before the bed, she began to praise the being so beautiful. Come,
I'll describe for you those
courtesan, comparing her to a Fra Angelico painting. All too soon, she
delicate female couples, and
heard someone laugh—and standing up she realized the joke that had been
far from the cities and the
played on her. She blushed and made for the door. When Liane hurried din, we'll forget everything
out from behind the screen, Natalie chastised her: the courtesan had the but the Ethics of Beauty.
face of an angel, but apparently not the spirit. Contrite, Liane whispered, —NATALIE BARNEY, LETTER TO
"Come back tomorrow morning. I'll be alone." LIANE DE POUGY,QUOTED IN
JEAN CHALON, PORTRAIT OF A
The young American showed up the next day, wearing the same outfit. SEDUCTRESS:THE WORLD OF
She was witty and spirited; Liane relaxed in her presence, and invited her to NATALIE BARNEY, TRANSLATED
BY CAROL BARKO
stay for the courtesan's morning ritual—the elaborate makeup, clothes, and
jewelry she put on before heading out into the world. Watching reverently,
Natalie remarked that she worshiped beauty, and that Liane was the most
Terrible Natalie, who used
beautiful woman she had ever seen. Playing the part of the page, she fol-
to ravage the land of love.
lowed Liane to the carriage, opened the door for her with a bow, and ac- Formidable Natalie, feared
companied her on her habitual ride through the Bois de Boulogne. Once by husbands since no one
could resist her
inside the park, Natalie knelt on the floor, out of sight of the passing
seductiveness. And one
gentlemen who tipped their hats to Liane. She recited poems she had writ- could see how women
361

[PAGE 390]
362 • The Art of Seduction
would abandon their ten in Liane's honor, and she told the courtesan she considered it a mission
husbands, homes, children, to rescue her from the seamy career into which she had fallen.
to follow this Circe of
That evening Natalie took her to the theater to see Sarah Bernhardt
Lesbos. • Circe's method
was to concoct magic play Hamlet. During the intermission, she told Liane that she identified
potions. Natalie preferred with Hamlet—his hunger for the sublime, his hatred of tyranny—which,
writing poems; she always
for her, was the tyranny of men over women. Over the next few days Liane
knew how to blend the
physical and the spiritual. received a steady flow of flowers from Natalie, and telegrams with little po-
ems in her honor. Slowly the worshipful words and looks became more
—-JEAN CHALON, PORTRAIT OF
A SEDUCTRESS: THE WORLD OF physical, with the occasional touch, then a caress, even a kiss—and a kiss
NATALIE BARNEY, TRANSLATED that felt different from any in Liane's experience. One morning, with
BY CAROL BARKO
Natalie in attendance, Liane prepared to take a bath. As she slipped out
of her nightgown, Natalie suddenly flung herself at her friend's feet, kissing
her ankles. The courtesan freed herself and hurried into the bath, only for
There once lived in the
Natalie to throw off her clothes and join her. Within a few days, all Paris
town of Gafsa, in Barbary,
a very rich man who had knew that Liane de Pougy had a new lover: Natalie Barney.
numerous children, among Liane made no effort to disguise her new affair, publishing a novel,
them a lovely and graceful
Idylle Saphique, detailing every aspect of Natalie's seduction. She had never
young daughter called
had an affair with a woman before, and she described her involvement with
Alibech. She was not
herself a Christian, but Natalie as something like a mystical experience. Even at the end of her
there were many long life, she remembered the affair as by far her most intense.
Christians in the town,
Renée Vivien was a young Englishwoman who had come to Paris to
and one day, having on
occasion heard them extol write poetry and flee the marriage that her father was trying to arrange for
the Christian faith and the her. Renée was obsessed with death; she also felt there was something
service of God, she asked
wrong with her, experiencing moments of intense self-loathing. In 1900,
one of them for his opinion
on the best and easiest way Renée met Natalie at the theater. Something about the American's kind
for a person to "serve eyes melted Renée's normal reserve, and she began sending poems to Na-
God," as they put it. He
talie, who responded with poems of her own. They soon became friends.
answered her by saying
Renée confessed that she had had an intense friendship with another
that the ones who served
God best were those who woman, but that it remained platonic—the thought of physical involve-
put the greatest distance ment repulsed her. Natalie told her about the ancient Greek poet Sappho,
between themselves and
who celebrated love between women as the only love that is innocent and
earthly goods, as happened
in the case of people who pure. One night Renée, inspired by their discussions, invited Natalie to her
had gone to live in the apartment, which she had transformed into a kind of chapel. The room
remoter parts of the
was filled with candles and with white lilies, the flowers she associated with
Sahara. • She said no
more about it to anyone, Natalie. That night the two women became lovers. They soon moved in
but next morning, being a together, but when Renée realized that Natalie could not be faithful to her,
very simple-natured
her love turned into hatred. She broke off the relationship, moved out, and
creature of fourteen or
vowed to never see her again.
thereabouts, Alibech set out
all alone, in secret, and Over the next few months Natalie sent her letters and poems, and
made her way toward the
showed up at her new home—all to no avail. Renée would have nothing to
desert, prompted by
do with her. One evening at the opera, though, Natalie sat down beside
nothing more logical than a
strong adolescent impulse. her and gave her a poem she had written in her honor. She expressed her
A few days later, regrets for the past, and also a simple request: the two women should go on
exhausted from fatigue and
a pilgrimage to the Greek island of Lesbos, Sappho's home. Only there
hunger, she arrived in the
heart of the wilderness, could they purify themselves and their relationship. Renée could not resist.

[PAGE 391]
Use Spiritual Lures • 363
On the island they retraced the poetess's steps, imagining they were trans- where, catching sight of a
ported back into the pagan, innocent days of ancient Greece. For Renée, small hut in the distance,
she stumbled toward it,
Natalie had become Sappho herself. When they finally returned to Paris,
and in the doorway she
Renée wrote her, "My blond Siren, I don't want you to become like those found a holy man, who
who dwell on earth. ... I want you to stay yourself, for this is the way you was astonished to see her in
those parts and asked her
cast your spell over me." Their affair lasted until Renée's death, in 1909.
what she was doing there.
She told him that she had
been inspired by God, and
Interpretation. Liane de Pougy and Renée Vivien both suffered a similar that she was trying, not
only to serve Him, but also
oppression: they were self-absorbed, hyperaware of themselves. The source
to find someone who could
of this habit in Liane was men's constant attention to her body. She could teach her how she should
never escape their looks, which plagued her with a feeling of heavi- go about it. • On
observing how young and
ness. Renée, meanwhile, thought too much about her own problems—
exceedingly pretty she was,
her repression of her lesbianism, her mortality. She felt consumed with the good man was afraid to
self-hatred. take her under his wing
lest the devil should catch
Natalie Barney, on the other hand, was buoyant, lighthearted, absorbed
him unawares. So he
in the world around her. Her seductions—and by the end of her life they praised her for her good
numbered well into the hundreds—all had a similar quality: she took the intentions, and having
victim outside herself, directing her attention toward beauty, poetry, the in- given her a quantity of
herb roots, wild apples, and
nocence of Sapphic love. She invited her women to participate in a kind of
dates to eat, and some
cult in which they would worship these sublimities. To heighten the cult- water to drink, he said to
like feeling, she involved them in little rituals: they would call each other by her: • "My daughter, not-
very far from here there is a
new names, send each other poems in daily telegrams, wear costumes,
holy man who is much
make pilgrimages to holy sites. Two things would inevitably happen: the more capable than I of
women would start to direct some of the worshipful feelings they were ex- teaching you what you
want to know. Go along to
periencing toward Natalie, who seemed as lofty and beautiful as the things
him." And he sent her
she held up to be adored; and, pleasantly diverted into this spiritualized upon her way. • When she
realm, they would also lose any heaviness they had felt about their bodies, came to this second man,
she was told precisely the
their selves, their identities. Their repression of their sexuality would melt
same thing, and so she
away. By the time Natalie kissed or caressed them, it would feel like some-
went on until she arrived
thing innocent, pure, as if they had returned to the Garden of Eden before at the cell of a young
the fall. hermit, a very devout and
kindly fellow called
Religion is the great balm of existence because it takes us outside our-
Rustico, to whom she put
selves, connects us to something larger. As we contemplate the object of the same inquiry as she
worship (God, nature), our burdens are lifted away. It is wonderful to feel had addressed to the others.
Being anxious to prove to
raised up from the earth, to experience that kind of lightness. No matter
himself that he possessed a
how progressive the times, many of us feel uncomfortable with our bodies, will of iron, he did not,
our animal drives. A seducer who focuses too much attention on the like the others, send her
away or direct her
physical will stir up self-consciousness, and a residue of disgust. So focus
elsewhere, but kept her
attention on something else. Invite the other person to worship some- with him in his cell, in a
thing beautiful in the world. It could be nature, a work of art, even God corner of which, when
night descended, he
(or gods—paganism never goes out of fashion); people are dying to be-
prepared a makeshift bed
lieve in something. Add some rituals. If you can make yourself seem to
out of palm leaves, upon
resemble the thing you are worshiping—you are natural, aesthetic, noble, which he invited her to lie
and sublime—your targets will transfer their worship to you. Religion and down and rest. • Once he

[PAGE 392]
364 • The Art of Seduction
had taken this step, very spirituality are full of sexual undertones that can be brought to the surface
little time elapsed before once you have made your targets lose their self-awareness. From spiritual
temptation went to war
ecstasy to sexual ecstasy is but one small step.
against his willpower, and
after the first few assaults,
finding himself Come back to take me, quickly, and lead me far away. Pu-
outmaneuvered on all rify me with a great fire of divine love, none of the animal
fronts, he laid down his
kind. You are all soul when you want to be, when you feel
arms and surrendered.
it, take me far away from my body.
Casting aside pious
thoughts, prayers, and
—LIANE DE POUGY
penitential exercises, he
began to concentrate his
mental faculties upon the
youth and beauty of the Keys to Seduction
girl, and to devise suitable
ways and means for
Religion is the most seductive system that mankind has created. Death
approaching her in such a
fashion that she should not is our greatest fear, and religion offers us the illusion that we are im-
think it lewd of him to mortal, that something about us will live on. The idea that we are an infini-
make the sort of proposal
tesimal part of a vast and indifferent universe is terrifying; religion
he had in mind. By
putting certain questions to humanizes this universe, makes us feel important and loved. We are not ani-
her, he soon discovered that mals governed by uncontrollable drives, animals that die for no apparent
she had never been
reason, but creatures made in the image of a supreme being. We too can be
intimate with the opposite
sex and was every hit as sublime, rational, and good. Anything that feeds a desire or a wished-for il-
innocent as she seemed; lusion is seductive, and nothing can match religion in this arena.
and he therefore thought of
Pleasure is the bait that you use to lure a person into your web. But no
a possible way to persuade
her, with the pretext of matter how clever a seducer you are, in the back of your targets' mind they
serving God, to grant his are aware of the endgame, the physical conclusion toward which you are
desires. He began by
heading. You may think your target is unrepressed and hungry for pleasure,
delivering a long speech in
but almost all of us are plagued by an underlying unease with our animal
which he showed her how
powerful an enemy the nature. Unless you deal with this unease, your seduction, even when suc-
devil was to the Lord God, cessful in the short term, will be superficial and temporary. Instead, like
and followed this up by
Natalie Barney, try to capture your target's soul, to build the foundation of
impressing upon her that of
all the ways of serving a deep and lasting seduction. Lure the victim deep into your web with
God, the one that He most spirituality, making physical pleasure seem sublime and transcendent. Spiri-
appreciated consisted in
tuality will disguise your manipulations, suggesting that your relationship is
putting the devil back in
Hell, to which the timeless, and creating a space for ecstasy in the victim's mind. Remember
Almighty had consigned that seduction is a mental process, and nothing is more mentally intoxicat-
him in the first place. •
ing than religion, spirituality, and the occult.
The girl asked him how
this was done, and Rustico In Gustave Flaubert's novel Madame Bovary, Rodolphe Boulanger visits
replied: • "You will soon the country doctor Bovary and finds himself interested in the doctor's
find out, but just do beautiful wife, Emma. Boulanger was brutal and shrewd. He was some-
whatever you see me doing
thing of a connoisseur: there had been many women in his life." He senses
for the present. "And so
saying, he began to divest that Emma is bored. A few weeks later he manages to run into her at a
himself of the few clothes county fair, where he gets her alone. He affects an air of sadness and
he was wearing, leaving
gloom: "Many's the time I've passed a cemetery in the moonlight and asked
himself completely naked.
The girl followed his myself if I wouldn't be better off lying there with the rest. ..." He men-
example, and he sank to tions his bad reputation; he deserves it, he says, but is it his fault? "Do you
his knees as though he
really not know that there exist souls that are ceaselessly in torment?" Sev-

[PAGE 393]
Use Spiritual Lures • 365
eral times he takes Emma's hand, but she politely withdraws it. He talks of were about to pray, getting
love, the magnetic force that draws two people together. Perhaps it has her to kneel directly
opposite. • In this posture,
roots in some earlier existence, some previous incarnation of their souls.
the girl's beauty was
"Take us, for example. Why should we have met? How did it happen? It displayed to Rustico in all
can only be that something in our particular inclinations made us come its glory, and his longings
blazed more fiercely than
closer and closer across the distance that separated us, the way two rivers
ever, bringing about the
flow together." He takes her hand again and this time she lets him hold it. res u rrectio n of the flesh.
After the fair, he avoids her for a few weeks, then suddenly shows up, Alibech stared at this in
amazement and said: •
claiming that he tried to stay away but that fate, destiny, has pulled him
"Rustico, what is that I see
back. He takes Emma riding. When he finally makes his move, in the
sticking out in front of
woods, she seems frightened and rejects his advances. "You must have some you, which I do not
mistaken idea," he protests. "I have you in my heart like a Madonna on a possess?" • "Oh, my
daughter," said Rustico,
pedestal. ... I beseech you: be my friend, my sister, my angel!" Under the
"this is the devil I was
spell of his words, she lets him hold her and lead her deeper into the telling you about. Do you
woods, where she succumbs. see what he's doing? He's
hurting me so much that I
Rodolphe's strategy is threefold. First he talks of sadness, melancholy,
can hardly endure it. " •
discontent, talk that makes him seem nobler than other people, as if life's "Oh, praise be to God,"
common material pursuits could not satisfy him. Next he talks of destiny, said the girl, "I can see
that I am better off than
the magnetic attraction of two souls. This makes his interest in Emma seem
you are, for I have no such
not so much a momentary impulse as something timeless, linked to the
devil to contend with." •
movement of the stars. Finally he talks of angels, the elevated and the sub- "You're right there;" said
lime. By placing everything on the spiritual plane, he distracts Emma from Rustico. "But you have
something else instead, that
the physical, makes her feel giddy, and packs a seduction that could have
I haven't." • "Oh?" said
taken months into a matter of a few encounters. Alibech. "And what's
The references Rodolphe uses might seem cliched by today's standards, that?" • "You have Hell,"
said Rustico. "And I
but the strategy itself will never grow old. Simply adapt it to the occult fads
honestly believe that God
of the day. Affect a spiritual air by displaying a discontent with the banali- has sent you here for the
ties of life. It is not money or sex or success that moves you; your drives are salvation of my soul,
because if this devil
never so base. No, something much deeper motivates you. Whatever this is,
continues to plague the life
keep it vague, letting the target imagine your hidden depths. The stars, as- out of me, and if you are
trology, fate, are always appealing; create the sense that destiny has brought prepared to take sufficient
you and your target together. That will make your seduction feel more pity upon me to let me put
him back into Hell, you
natural. In a world where too much is controlled and manufactured, the
will be giving me
sense that fate, necessity, or some higher power is guiding your relationship marvelous relief, as well as
is doubly seductive. If you want to weave religious motifs into your seduc- rendering incalculable
service and pleasure to
tion, it is always best to choose some distant, exotic religion with a slightly
God, which is what you
pagan air. It is easy to move from pagan spirituality to pagan earthiness. say you came here for in
Timing counts: once you have stirred your targets' souls, move quickly to the first place." • "Oh,
Father," replied the girl in
the physical, making sexuality seem merely an extension of the spiritual vi-
all innocence, "if I really
brations you are experiencing. In other words, employ the spiritual strategy do have Hell, let's do as
as close to the time for your bold move as possible. you suggest just as soon as
you are ready." • "God
The spiritual is not exclusively the religious or the occult. It is anything
bless you, my daughter,"
that will add a sublime, timeless quality to your seduction. In the modern said Rustico. "Let's go and
world, culture and art have in some ways taken the place of religion. There put him back, and then
perhaps he'll leave me
are two ways to use art in your seduction: first, create it yourself, in the tar-
alone. " • At which point
get's honor. Natalie Barney wrote poems, and barraged her targets with

[PAGE 394]
366 • The Art of Seduction
them. Half of Picasso's appeal to many women was the hope that he would
he conveyed the girl to one
of their beds, where he immortalize them in his paintings—for Ars longa, vita brevis (Art is long, life
instructed her in the art of is short), as they used to say in Rome. Even if your love is a passing fancy,
incarcerating that accursed
by capturing it in a work of art you give it a seductive illusion of eternity.
fiend. • Never having put
a single devil into Hell The second way to use art is to make it ennoble the affair, giving your se-
before, the girl found the duction an elevated edge. Natalie Barney took her targets to the theater, to
first experience a little
the opera, to museums, to places full of history and atmosphere. In such
painful, and she said to
Rustico: • "This devil places your souls can vibrate to the same spiritual wavelength. Of course
must certainly be a bad lot, you should avoid works of art that are earthy or vulgar, calling attention to
Father, and a true enemy
your intentions. The play, movie, or book can be contemporary, even a lit-
of God, for as well as
plaguing mankind, he even tle raw, as long as it contains a noble message and is tied to some just cause.
hurts Hell when he's Even a political movement can be spiritually uplifting. Remember to tailor
driven back inside it. " • your spiritual lures to the target. If the target is earthy and cynical, pagan-
"Daughter," said Rustico,
ism or art will be more productive than the occult or religious piety.
"it will not always be like
that." And in order to The Russian mystic Rasputin was revered for his saintliness and his
ensure that it wouldn't, healing powers. Women in particular were fascinated with Rasputin and
before moving from the bed
would visit him in his St. Petersburg apartment for spiritual guidance. He
they put him back half a
dozen times, curbing his would talk to them of the simple goodness of the Russian peasantry, God's
arrogance to such good forgiveness, and other lofty matters. But after a few minutes of this, he
effect that he was positively
would inject a comment or two that were of a much different nature—
glad to keep still for the rest
of the day. • During the something about the woman's beauty, her lips that were so inviting, the de-
next few days, however, the sires she could inspire in a man. He would talk of different kinds of
devil's pride frequently
love—love of God, love between friends, love between a man and a
reared its head again, and
woman—but mix them all up as if they were one. Then as he returned to
the girl, ever ready to obey
the call to duty and bring discussing spiritual matters, he would suddenly take the woman's hand, or
him under control, whisper into her ear. All this would have an intoxicating effect—women
happened to develop a taste
would find themselves dragged into a kind of maelstrom, both spiritually
for the sport, and began
saying to Rustico: • "I can uplifted and sexually excited. Hundreds of women succumbed during
certainly see what those these spiritual visits, for he would also tell them that they could not repent
worthy men in Gafsa
until they had sinned, and who better to sin with than Rasputin.
meant when they said that
serving God was so Rasputin understood the intimate connection between the sexual and
agreeable. I don't honestly the spiritual. Spirituality, the love of God, is a sublimated version of sexual
recall ever having done
love. The language of the religious mystics of the Middle Ages is full of
anything that gave me so
much pleasure and erotic images; the contemplation of God and of the sublime can offer a
satisfaction as I get from kind of mental orgasm. There is no more seductive brew than the combi-
putting the devil back in
nation of the spiritual and the sexual, the high and the low. When you talk
Hell. To my way of
of spiritual matters, then, let your looks and physical presence hint of sexu-
thinking, anyone who
devotes his energies to ality at the same time. Make the harmony of the universe and union with
anything but the service of God seem to confuse with physical harmony and the union between two
God is a complete
people. If you can make the endgame of your seduction appear as a spiri-
blockhead." • . . . And so,
young ladies, if you stand tual experience, you will heighten the physical pleasure and create a seduc-
in need of God's grace, see tion with a deep and lasting effect.

[PAGE 395]
Use Spiritual Lures • 367
Symbol: The Stars in the sky. Objects of worship for cen- that you learn to put the
devil back in Hell, for it is
turies, and symbols of the sublime and divine. In contemplat-
greatly to His liking and
pleasurable to the parties
ing them, we are momentarily distracted from everything
concerned, and a great deal
of good can arise and flow
mundane and mortal. We feel lightness. Lift your tar-
in the process.
gets' minds up to the stars and they will not —GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO,
THE DECAMERON, TRANSLATED
notice what is happening here BY G. H. MCWILLIAM
on earth.
Reversal
Letting your targets feel that your affection is neither temporary nor
superficial will often make them fall deeper under your spell. In some,
though, it can arouse an anxiety: the fear of commitment, of a claustro-
phobic relationship with no exits. Never let your spiritual lures seem to be
leading in that direction, then. To focus attention on the distant future may
implicitly constrict their freedom; you should be seducing them, not offer-
ing to marry them. What you want is to make them lose themselves in the
moment, experiencing the timeless depth of your feelings in the present
tense. Religious ecstasy is about intensity, not temporal extensity.
Giovanni Casanova used many spiritual lures in his seductions—the oc-
cult, anything that would inspire lofty sentiments. For the time that he was
involved with a woman, she would feel that he would do anything for her,
that he was not just using her only to abandon her. But she also knew that
when it became convenient to end the affair, he would cry, give her a mag-
nificent gift, then quietly leave. This was just what many young women
wanted—a temporary diversion from marriage or an oppressive family.
Sometimes pleasure is best when we know it is fleeting.

[PAGE 396]


[PAGE 397]
Mix Pleasure with Pain
The
greatest mistake in seduction is being too nice.
At first, perhaps, your kindness is charming, but it soon grows
monotonous; you are trying too hard to please, and seem insecure. Instead
of overwhelming your targets with niceness, try inflicting some pain. Lure them
in with focused attention, then change direction, appearing suddenly uninterested.
Make them feel guilty and insecure. Even instigate a breakup, subjecting them to an
emptiness and pain that will give you room to maneuver—now a rapprochement,
an apology, a return to your earlier kindness, will turn them weak at the
knees. The lower the lows you create, the greater the highs. To
heighten the erotic charge, create the excitement
of fear.

[PAGE 398]


[PAGE 399]
The Emotional Roller Coaster
One hot summer afternoon in 1894, Don Mateo Díaz, a thirty-eight-
year-old resident of Seville, decided to visit a local tobacco factory
Because of his connections Don Mateo was allowed to tour the place, but
his interest was not in the business side. Don Mateo liked young girls, and
hundreds of them worked in the factory. Just as he had expected, that day
many of them were in a state of near undress because of the heat—it was
quite a spectacle. He enjoyed the sights for a while, but the noise and the The more one pleases
generally, the less one
temperature soon got to him. As he was heading for the door, though, a
pleases profoundly.
worker of no more than sixteen called out to him: "Caballero, if you will
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
give me a penny I will sing you a little song."
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
The girl's name was Conchita Pérez, and she looked young and inno- SUZANNE SALE
cent, in fact beautiful, with a sparkle in her eye that suggested a taste for ad-
venture. The perfect prey. He listened to her song (which seemed vaguely
suggestive), tossed her a coin that was equal to a month's salary, tipped his You should mix in the odd
hat, then left. It was never good to come on too strong too early. As he rebuff \ With your cheerful
fun. Shut him out of the
walked along the street, he plotted how he would lure her into an affair.
house, let him wait there \
Suddenly he felt a hand on his arm and he turned to see her walking along- Cursing that locked front
side him. It was too hot to work—would he be a gentleman and escort her door, let him plead \ And
threaten all he's a mind to.
home? Of course. Do you have a lover? he asked her. No, she said, "I am
Sweetness cloys the palate,
mozita"—pure, a virgin. \ Bitter juice is a freshener.
Conchita lived with her mother in a rundown part of town. Don Ma- Often a small skiff \ Is
sunk by favoring winds: it's
teo exchanged pleasantries, slipped the mother some money (he knew from
their husbands' access to
experience how important it was to keep the mother happy), then left. He them, \ At will, that
considered waiting a few days, but he was impatient, and returned the fol- deprives so many wives of
love. \ Let her put in a
lowing morning. The mother was out. He and Conchita resumed their
door, with a hard-faced
playful banter from the day before, and to his surprise she suddenly sat in
porter to tell him \ "Keep
his lap, put her arms around him, and kissed him. His strategy flying out out," and he'll soon be
the window, he took hold of her and returned the kiss. She immediately touched with desire \
Through frustration. Put
jumped up, her eyes flashing with anger: you are trifling with me, she said,
down your blunt foils, fight
using me for a quick thrill. Don Mateo denied having any such intentions, with sharpened weapons \
and apologized for going too far. When he left, he felt confused: she had (I don't doubt that my own
shafts \ Will be turned
started it all; why should he feel guilty? And yet he did. Young girls can be
against me). When a
so unpredictable; it is best to break them in slowly new-captured lover \ Is
Over the next few days Don Mateo was the perfect gentleman. He stumbling into the toils,
then let him believe \ He
visited every day, showered mother and daughter with gifts, made no
alone has rights to your
advances—at least not at first. The damned girl had become so familiar bed—but later, make him
371

[PAGE 400]
372 • The Art of Seduction
conscious \ Of rivals, of with him that she would dress in front of him, or greet him in her night-
shared delights. Neglect \ gown. These glimpses of her body drove him crazy, and he would some-
These devices—his ardor
times try to steal a kiss or caress, only to have her push him away and scold
will wane. A racehorse runs
most strongly \ When the him. Weeks went by; clearly he had shown that his was not a passing fancy.
field's ahead, to be paced \ Tired of the endless courtship, he took Conchita's mother aside one day
And passed. So the dying
and proposed that he set the girl up in a house of her own. He would treat
embers of passion can be
her like a queen; she would have everything she wanted. (So, of course,
fanned to \ Fresh flame by
some outrage—I can only would her mother.) Surely his proposal would satisfy the two women—but
love, \ Myself, I confess it, the next day, a note came from Conchita, expressing not gratitude but re-
when wronged. But don't
crimination: he was trying to buy her love. "You shall never see me again,"
let the cause of \ Pain be
too obvious: let a lover she concluded. He hurried to the house only to discover that the women
suspect \ More than he had moved out that very morning, without leaving word where they were
knows. Invent a slave who
going.
watches your every \
Movement, make clear Don Mateo felt terrible. Yes, he had acted like a boor. Next time he
what a jealous martinet \ would wait months, or years if need be, before being so bold. Soon, how-
That man of yours is—
ever, another thought assailed him: he would never see Conchita again.
such things will excite him.
Only then did he realize how much he loved her.
Pleasure \ Too safely
enjoyed lacks zest. You The winter passed, the worst of Mateo's life. One spring day he was
want to be free \ As Thaïs? walking down the street when he heard someone calling his name. He
Act scared. Though the
looked up: Conchita was standing in an open window, beaming with ex-
door's quite safe, let him in
by \ The window. Look citement. She bent down toward him and he kissed her hand, beside him-
nervous. Have a smart \ self with joy. Why had she disappeared so suddenly? It was all going too
Maid rush in, scream
quickly, she said. She had been afraid—of his intentions, and of her own
"We're caught!" while you
bundle the quaking \ Youth feelings. But seeing him again, she was certain that she loved him. Yes, she
out of sight. But be sure \ was ready to be his mistress. She would prove it, she would come to him.
To offset his fright with
Being apart had changed them both, he thought.
some moments of carefree
pleasure— \ Or he'll think A few nights later, as promised, she appeared at his house. They kissed
a night with you isn't and began to undress. He wanted to savor every minute, to take it slowly,
worth the risk.
but he felt like a caged bull finally set free. He followed her into bed, his
—OVID. THE ART OF LOVE, hands all over her. He started to take off her underwear but it was laced up
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
in some complicated way. Eventually he had to sit up and take a look: she
was wearing some elaborate canvas contraption, of a kind he had never
seen. No matter how hard he tugged and pulled, it would not come off.
"Certainly," I said, "I
He felt like hitting Conchita, he was so distraught, but instead he started to
have often told you that
pain holds a peculiar cry. She explained: she wanted to do everything with him, yet to remain a
attraction for me, and that mozita. This was her protection. Exasperated, he sent her home.
nothing kindles my passion
Over the next few weeks, Don Mateo began to reassess his opinion of
quite so much as tyranny
Conchita. He saw her flirting with other men, and dancing a suggestive fla-
cruelty and above all
unfaithfulness in a menco in a bar: she was not a mozita, he decided, she was playing him for
beautiful woman." money. And yet he could not leave her. Another man would take his
—LEOPOLD VON SACHER- place—an unbearable thought. She would invite him to spend the night in
MASOCH, VENUS IN FURS,
her bed, as long as he promised not to force himself on her; and then, as if
TRANSLATED BY JEAN MCNEIL
to torture him beyond reason, she would get into bed naked (supposedly
because of the heat). All this he put up with on the grounds that no other
man had such privileges. But one night, pushed to the limits of frustration,
he exploded with anger, and issued an ultimatum: either give me what I

[PAGE 401]
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 373
want or you will never see me again. Suddenly Conchita started to cry. He Oderint, dum metuant
had never seen her cry, and it moved him. She too was tired of all this, she [Let them hate me so long
as they fear me], as if only
said, her voice trembling; if it was not too late, she was ready to accept the
fear and hate belong
proposal she had once turned down. Set her up in a house, and he would together, whereas fear and
see what a devoted mistress she would be. love have nothing to do
with each other, as if it
Don Mateo wasted no time. He bought her a villa, gave her plenty of
were not fear that makes
money to decorate it. After eight days the house was ready. She would re-
love interesting. With what
ceive him there at midnight. What joys awaited him. kind of love do we embrace
Don Mateo showed up at the appointed hour. The barred door to the nature? Is there not a
secretive anxiety and horror
courtyard was closed. He rang the bell. She came to the other side of the
in it, because its beautiful
door. "Kiss my hands," she said through the bars. "Now kiss the hem of my harmony works its way out
skirt, and the tip of my foot in its slipper." He did as she requested. "That is of lawlessness and wild
confusion, its security out
good," she said. "Now you may go." His shocked expression just made her
of perfidy? But precisely
laugh. She ridiculed him, then made a confession: she was repulsed by him. this anxiety captivates the
Now that she had a villa in her name, she was free of him at last. She called most. So also with love, if
it is to he interesting.
out, and a young man appeared from the shadows of the courtyard. As Don
Behind it ought to brood
Mateo watched, too stunned to move, they began to make love on the the deep, anxious night
floor, right before his eyes. from which springs the
flower of love.
The next morning Conchita appeared at Don Mateo's house, suppos-
edly to see if he had committed suicide. To her surprise, he hadn't—in fact —SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
he slapped her so hard she fell to the ground. "Conchita," he said, "you THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
have made me suffer beyond all human strength. You have invented moral HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
tortures to try them on the only man who loved you passionately. I now
declare that I am going to possess you by force." Conchita screamed she
would never be his, but he hit her again and again. Finally, moved by her
The lovely marble creature
tears, he stopped. Now she looked up at him lovingly. Forget the past, she
coughed and rearranged the
said, forget all that I have done. Now that he hit her, now that she could see sable around her shoulders.
his pain, she felt certain he truly loved her. She was still a mozita—the affair • "Thank you for the
lesson in classics," I replied,
with the young man the night before had been only for show, ending as
"but I cannot deny that in
soon as he had left—and she still belonged to him. "You are not going to your peaceful and sunny
take me by force. I await you in my arms." Finally she was sincere. To his world just as in our misty
climate man and woman
supreme delight, he discovered that she was indeed still a virgin.
are natural enemies. Love
may unite them briefly to
form one mind, one heart,
one will, but all too soon
Interpretation. Don Mateo and Conchita Perez are characters in the 1896
they are torn asunder. And
novella Woman and Puppet, by Pierre Louÿs. Based on a true story—the this you know better than
"Miss Charpillon" episode in Casanova's Memoirs—the novella has served as I: either one of them must
the basis for two films: Josef von Sternberg's Devil Is a Woman, with Mar- bend the other to his will,
or else he must let himself
lene Dietrich, and Luis Buñuel's That Obscure Object of Desire. In Louÿs's
be trampled underfoot. " •
story, Conchita takes a proud and aggressive older man and in the space of a "Under the woman's foot,
few months turns him into an abject slave. Her method is simple: she stimu- of course," said Lady
Venus impertinently. "And
lates as many emotions as possible, including heavy doses of pain. She ex-
that you know better than
cites his lust, then makes him feel base for taking advantage of her. She gets I." • "Of course, that is
him to play the protector, then makes him feel guilty for trying to buy her. why I have no illusions." •
"In other words you are
Her sudden disappearance anguishes him—he has lost her—so that when
now my slave without
she reappears (never by accident) he feels intense joy; which, however, she illusions, and I shall

[PAGE 402]
374 • The Art of Seduction
trample you mercilessly. " • quickly turns back into tears. Jealousy and humiliation then precede the fi-
"Madam!" • "You do not nal moment when she gives him her virginity. (Even after this, according to
know me yet. I admit that
the story, she finds ways to continue to torment him.) Each low she
I am cruel—since the word
inspires—guilt, despair, jealousy, emptiness—creates the space for a more
gives you so much
delight—but am I not intense high. He becomes an addict, hooked on the alternation of charge
entitled to be so? It is man and withdrawal.
who desires, woman who is
Your seduction should never follow a simple course upward toward
desired; this is woman's
only advantage, but it is a pleasure and harmony. The climax will come too soon, and the pleasure
decisive one. By making will be weak. What makes us intensely appreciate something is previous
man so vulnerable to
suffering. A brush with death makes us fall in love with life; a long journey
passion, nature has placed
him at woman's mercy, and makes a return home that much more pleasurable. Your task is to create
she who has not the sense moments of sadness, despair, and anguish, to create the tension that allows
to treat him like a humble
for a great release. Do not worry about making people angry; anger is a
subject, a slave, a
sure sign that you have your hooks in them. Nor should you be afraid that
plaything, and finally to
betray him with a laugh— if you make yourself difficult people will flee—we only abandon those
well, she is a woman of who bore us. The ride on which you take your victims can be tortuous but
little wisdom." • "My
never dull. At all costs, keep your targets emotional and on edge. Create
dear, your principles . . ."
I protested. • "Are enough highs and lows and you will wear away the last vestiges of their
founded on the experience willpower.
of a thousand years," she
replied mischievously,
running her white fingers
through the dark fur. "The Harshness and Kindness
more submissive woman is,
the more readily man
In 1972, Henry Kissinger, then President Richard Nixon's assistant for
recovers his self-possession
and becomes domineering; national security affairs, received a request for an interview from the fa-
but the more cruel and mous Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci. Kissinger rarely gave interviews; he
faithless she is, the more
had no control over the final product, and he was a man who needed to be
she ill-treats him, the
more wantonly she toys in control. But he had read Fallaci's interview with a North Vietnamese
with him and the harsher general, and it had been instructive. She was extremely well informed on
she is, the more she
the Vietnam War; perhaps he could gather some information of his own,
quickens his desire and
secures his love and pick her brain. He decided to ask for a preinterview, a preliminary meeting.
admiration. It has always He would grill her on different subjects; if she passed the test, he would
been so, from the time of
grant her an interview proper. They met, and he was impressed; she was
Helen and Delilah all the
way to Catherine the extremely intelligent—and tough. It would be an enjoyable challenge to
Great and Lola Montez. " outwit her and prove that he was tougher. He agreed to a short interview a
—LEOPOLD VON SACHER- few days later.
MASOCH, VENUS IN FURS, To Kissinger's annoyance, Fallaci began the interview by asking him
TRANSLATED BY JEAN MCNEIL
whether he was disappointed by the slow pace of the peace negotiations
with North Vietnam. He would not discuss the negotiations—he had made
that clear in the preinterview. Yet she continued the same line of question-
In essence, the domain ing. He grew a little angry "That's enough," he said. "I don't want to
of eroticism is the domain of
talk any more about Vietnam." Although she didn't immediately aban-
violence, of violation. . . .
The whole business of don the subject, her questions became gentler: what were his personal feel-
eroticism is to strike to the ings toward the leaders of South and North Vietnam? Still, he ducked:
inmost core of the living
"I'm not the kind of person to be swayed by emotion. Emotions serve
being, so that the heart
no purpose." She moved to grander philosophical issues—war, peace. She
stands still. . . . The

[PAGE 403]
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 375
praised him for his role in the rapprochement with China. Without real- whole business of
izing it, Kissinger began to open up. He talked of the pain he felt in dealing eroticism is to destroy the
self-contained character of
with Vietnam, the pleasures of wielding power. Then suddenly the harsher
the participators as they are
questions returned—was he simply Nixon's lackey, as many suspected? Up
in their normal lives. . . .
and down she went, alternately baiting and flattering him. His goal had We ought never to forget
been to pump her for information while revealing nothing about himself; that in spite of the bliss
love promises its first effect
by the end, though, she had given him nothing, while he had revealed a
is one of turmoil and
range of embarrassing opinions—his view of women as playthings, for in- distress. Passion fulfilled
stance, and his belief that he was popular with the public because people itself provokes such violent
agitation that the
saw him as a kind of lonesome cowboy, the hero who cleans things up by
happiness involved, before
himself. When the interview was published, Nixon, Kissinger's boss, was being a happiness to be
livid about it. enjoyed, is so great as to be
more like its opposite,
In 1973, the Shah of Iran, Mohammed Riza Pahlavi, granted Fallaci an
suffering. . . . The
interview. He knew how to handle the press—be noncommittal, speak in likelihood of suffering is all
generalities, seem firm, yet polite. This approach had worked a thousand the greater since suffering
times before. Fallaci began the interview on a personal level, asking how it alone reveals the total
significance of the beloved
felt to be a king, to be the target of assassination attempts, and why the
object.
shah always seemed so sad. He talked of the burdens of his position, the
—GEORGES BATAILLE,
pain and loneliness he felt. It seemed a release of sorts to talk about his pro-
EROTISM: DEATH AND
fessional problems. As he talked, Fallaci said little, her silence goading him SENSUALITY, TRANSLATED BY
MARY DALWOOD
on. Then she suddenly changed the subject: he was having difficulties with
his second wife. Surely that must hurt him? This was a sore spot, and
Pahlavi got angry. He tried to change the subject, but she kept returning to
it. Why waste time talking about wives and women, he said. He then went Always a little doubt to set
so far as to criticize women in general—their lack of creativity, their cru- at rest—that's what keeps
one craving in passionate
elty. Fallaci kept at him: he had dictatorial tendencies and his country
love. Because the keenest
lacked basic freedoms. Fallaci's own books were on his government's black- misgivings are always
list. Hearing this, the shah seemed somewhat taken aback—perhaps he was there, its pleasures never
become tedious. • Saint-
dealing with a subversive writer. But then she softened her tone again,
Simon, the only historian
asked him about his many achievements. The pattern repeated: the mo- France has ever possessed,
ment he relaxed, she blindsided him with a sharp question; when he grew says: "After many passing
fancies the Duchesse de
bitter, she lightened the mood. Like Kissinger, he found himself opening
Berry had fallen deeply in
up despite himself and mentioning things he would later regret, such as his
love with Riom, a junior
intention to raise the price of oil. Slowly he fell under her spell, even began member of the d'Aydie
to flirt with her. "Even if you're on the blacklist of my authorities," he said family, the son of one of
Madame de Biron's sisters.
at the end of the interview, "I'll put you on the white list of my heart."
He had neither looks nor
brains; he was fat, short,
chubby-cheeked, pale, and
had such a crop of pimples
Interpretation. Most of Fallaci's interviews were with powerful leaders,
that he seemed one large
men and women with an overwhelming need to control the situation, to abscess; he had beautiful
avoid revealing anything embarrassing. This put her and her subjects in con- teeth, but not the least idea
that he was going to inspire
flict, since getting them to open up—grow emotional, give up control—
a passion which quickly got
was exactly what she wanted. The classic seductive approach of charm and out of control, a passion
flattery would get her nowhere with these people; they would see right which lasted a lifetime,
notwithstanding a number
through it. Instead, Fallaci preyed on their emotions, alternating harshness
of subsidiary flirtations and
and kindness. She would ask a cruel question that touched on the deepest affairs. . . . • He would

[PAGE 404]
376 • The Art of Seduction
excite but not requite the insecurities of the subject, who would get emotional and defensive; deep
desire of the princess; he down, though, something else would stir inside them—the desire to prove
delighted in making her
to Fallaci that they did not deserve her implicit criticisms. Unconsciously
jealous, or pretending to be
they wanted to please her, to make her like them. When she then shifted
jealous himself. He would
often drive her to tears. tone, indirectly praising them, they felt they were winning her over and
Gradually he forced her were encouraged to open up. Without realizing it, they would give freer
into the position of doing
rein to their emotions.
nothing without his leave,
even trifles of no In social situations we all wear masks, and keep our defenses up. It is
importance. Sometimes, embarrassing, after all, to reveal one's true feelings. As a seducer you must
when she was ready to go
find a way to lower these resistances. The Charmer's approach of flattery
to the Opera, he insisted
that she stay at home; and and attention can be effective here, particularly with the insecure, but it can
sometimes he made her go take months of work, and can also backfire. To get a quicker result, and to
there against her will. He
break down more inaccessible people, it is often better to alternate harsh-
obliged her to grant favours
to ladies she did not like or ness and kindness. By being harsh you create inner tensions—your targets
of whom she was jealous. may be upset with you, but they are also asking themselves questions. What
She was not even free to have they done to earn your dislike? When you then are kind, they feel
dress as she chose; he
relieved, but also concerned that at any moment they might somehow dis-
would amuse himself by
making her change her please you again. Make use of this pattern to keep them in suspense—
coiffure or her dress at the dreading your harshness and keen to keep you kind. Your kindness and
last minute; he did this so
harshness should be subtle; indirect digs and compliments are best. Play the
often and so publicly that
she became accustomed to psychoanalyst: make cutting comments concerning their unconscious mo-
take his orders in the tives (you are only being truthful), then sit back and listen. Your silence will
evening for what she would
goad them into embarrassing admissions. Leaven your judgments with oc-
do and wear the following
day; then the next day he casional praise and they will strive to please you, like dogs.
would alter everything, and
the princess would cry all
Love is a costly flower, but one must have the desire to
the more. In the end she
pluck it from the edge of a precipice.
took to sending him
messages by trusted
—STENDHAL
footmen, for from the first
he had taken up residence
in Luxembourg; messages
Keys to Seduction
which continued
throughout her toilette, to
know what ribbons she Almost everyone is more or less polite. We learn early on not to tell
would wear, what gown
and other ornaments; people what we really think of them; we smile at their jokes, act inter-
almost invariably he made ested in their stories and problems. It is the only way to live with them.
her wear something she did
Eventually this becomes a habit; we are nice, even when it isn't really nec-
not wish to. When she
essary. We try to please other people, to not step on their toes, to avoid dis-
occasionally dared to do
anything, however small, agreements and conflict.
without his leave, he Niceness in seduction, however, though it may at first draw someone to
treated her like a servant,
you (it is soothing and comforting), soon loses all effect. Being too nice can
and she was in tears for
several days. • . . . Before literally push the target away from you. Erotic feeling depends on the cre-
assembled company he ation of tension. Without tension, without anxiety and suspense, there can
would give her such
be no feeling of release, of true pleasure and joy It is your task to create
brusque replies that
everyone lowered their eyes, that tension in the target, to stimulate feelings of anxiety, to lead them to
and the Duchess would and fro, so that the culmination of the seduction has real weight and inten-
blush, though her passion
sity. So rid yourself of your nasty habit of avoiding conflict, which is in any

[PAGE 405]
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 377
case unnatural. You are most often nice not out of your own inner good- for him was in no way
ness but out of fear of displeasing, out of insecurity. Go beyond that fear curtailed." • For the
princess, Riom was a
and you suddenly have options—the freedom to create pain, then magically
sovereign remedy against
dissolve it. Your seductive powers will increase tenfold. boredom.
People will be less upset by your hurtful actions than you might imag-
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
ine. In the world today, we often feel starved for experience. We crave TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
emotion, even if it is negative. The pain you cause your targets, then, is SUZANNE SALE
bracing—it makes them feel more alive. They have something to complain
about, they get to play the victim. As a result, once you have turned the
pain into pleasure they will readily forgive you. Stir up their jealousy, make
them feel insecure, and the validation you later give their ego by preferring
them over their rivals is doubly delightful. Remember: you have more to
fear by boring your targets than by shaking them up. Wounding people
binds them to you more deeply than kindness. Create tension so you can
release it. If you need inspiration, find the part of the target that most irri-
tates you and use it as a springboard for some therapeutic conflict. The
more real your cruelty, the more effective it is.
In 1818, the French writer Stendhal, then living in Milan, met the
Countess Metilda Viscontini. For him, it was love at first sight. She was a
proud, somewhat difficult woman, and she intimidated Stendhal, who was
terribly afraid of displeasing her with a stupid comment or undignified act.
Finally, unable to take it any longer, he one day took her hand and confessed
his love. Horrified, the countess told him to leave and never come back.
Stendhal flooded Viscontini with letters, begging her to forgive him. At
last, she relented: she would see him again, but under one condition—he
could visit only once every two weeks, for no more than an hour, and only
in the presence of company. Stendhal agreed; he had no choice. He now
lived for those short fortnightly visits, which became occasions of intense
anxiety and fear, since he was never quite sure whether she would change
her mind and banish him forever. This went on for over two years, during
which the countess never showed him the slightest sign of favor. Stendhal
never found out why she had insisted on this arrangement—perhaps she
wanted to toy with him or keep him at a distance. All he knew was that his
love for her only grew stronger, became unbearably intense, until finally he
had to leave Milan.
To get over this sad affair, Stendhal wrote his famous book On Love, in
which he described the effect of fear on desire. First, if you fear the loved
one, you can never get too close or familiar with him or her. The beloved
then retains an element of mystery, which only intensifies your love. Sec-
ond, there is something bracing about fear. It makes you vibrate with sensa-
tion, heightens your awareness, is intensely erotic. According to Stendhal,
the closer the loved one brings you to the edge of the precipice, to the feel-
ing that they could abandon you, the dizzier and more lost you will be-
come. Falling in love means literally falling—losing control, a mix of fear
and excitement.
Apply this wisdom in reverse: never let your targets get too comfortable

[PAGE 406]
378 • The Art of Seduction
with you. They need to feel fear and anxiety. Show them some coldness, a
flash of anger they did not expect. Be irrational if necessary. There is always
the trump card: a breakup. Let them feel they have lost you forever, make
them fear that they have lost the power to charm you. Let these feelings sit
with them for a while, then pull them back from the precipice. The recon-
ciliation will be intense.
In 33 B.C., Mark Antony heard a rumor that Cleopatra, his lover of
several years, had decided to seduce his rival, Octavius, and that she was
planning to poison Antony. Cleopatra had poisoned people before; in fact
she was an expert in the art. Antony grew paranoid, and finally one day
confronted her. Cleopatra did not protest her innocence. Yes, that was true,
it was quite within her power to poison Antony at any moment; there were
no precautions he could take. Only the love she felt for him could protect
him. To demonstrate, she took some flowers and dropped them into his
wine. Antony hesitated, then raised the cup to his lips; Cleopatra grabbed
his arm and stopped him. She had a prisoner brought in to drink the wine,
and the prisoner promptly dropped dead. Falling at Cleopatra's feet,
Antony professed that he loved her now more than ever. He did not speak
out of cowardice; there was no man braver than he, and if Cleopatra could
have poisoned him, he for his part could have left her and gone back to
Rome. No, what pushed him over the edge was the feeling that she had
control over his emotions, over life and death. He was her slave. Her
demonstration of her power over him was not only effective but erotic.
Like Antony, many of us have masochistic yearnings without realizing
it. It takes someone to inflict some pain on us for these deeply repressed de-
sires to come to the surface. You must learn to recognize the types of hid-
den masochists out there, for each one enjoys a particular kind of pain. For
instance, there are people who feel that they deserve nothing good in life,
and who, unable to deal with success, sabotage themselves constantly. Be
nice to them, admit that you admire them, and they are uncomfortable,
since they feel that they cannot possibly match up to the ideal figure you
have clearly imagined them to be. Such self-saboteurs do better with a little
punishment; scold them, make them aware of their inadequacies. They feel
they deserve such criticism and when it comes it is with a sense of relief. It
is also easy to make them feel guilty, a feeling that deep down they enjoy.
Other people experience the responsibilities and duties of modern life
as such a heavy burden, they long to give it all up. These people are often
looking for someone or something to worship—a cause, a religion, a guru.
Make them worship you. And then there are those who want to play the
martyr. Recognize them by the joy they take in complaining, in feeling
righteous and wronged; then give them a reason to complain. Remember:
appearances deceive. Often the strongest-looking people—the Kissingers
and Don Mateos—may secretly want to be punished. In any event, follow
up pain with pleasure and you will create a state of dependency that will
last for a long time.

[PAGE 407]
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 379
Symbol: The Precipice. At the edge of a cliff, people often feel
lightheaded, both fearful and dizzy. For a moment they
can imagine themselves falling headlong. At the
same time, a part of them is tempted. Lead
your targets as close to the edge as
possible, then pull them
back. No thrill
without
fear.
Reversal
People who have recently experienced a lot of pain or a loss will flee if
you try to inflict more on them. They have enough in their lives al-
ready. Far better to surround these types with pleasure—that will put them
under your spell. The technique of inflicting pain works best on those who
have it easy, who have power and few problems. People with comfortable
lives may also feel a gnawing sense of guilt, as if they had gotten away with
something. They may not consciously know it, but secretly they long for
some punishment, a good mental thrashing, something that will bring
them back down to earth.
Also, remember to not use the pleasure-through-pain tactic too early
on. Some of the greatest seducers in history—Byron, Jiang Qing (Madame
Mao), Picasso—had a sadistic streak, an ability to inflict mental torture. If
their victims had known in advance what they were getting themselves
into, they would have run for the hills. In truth, most of these seducers
lured their targets into their webs by appearing to be paragons of sweetness
and affection. Even Byron seemed like an angel when he first met a
woman, so that she tended to doubt his devilish reputation—a seductive
doubt, for it allowed her to think of herself as the only one who really
understood him. His cruelty would come out later on, but by then it would
be too late. The victim's emotions were engaged, and his harshness would
only intensify her feelings.
In the beginning, then, wear the mask of a lamb, making pleasure and
attentiveness your bait. First get under their skin, then lead them on a wild
ride.

[PAGE 408]


[PAGE 409]
Phase Four
Moving In for the Kill
First you worked on their mind—the mental seduction. Then you
confused and stirred them up—the emotional seduction. Now the
time has come for hand-to-hand combat—the physical seduction.
At this point, your victims are weak and ripe with desire: by show-.
ing a little coldness or uninterest, you will spark panic—they will
come after you with impatience and erotic energy (21: Give them
space to fall—the pursuer is pursued). To bring them to a boil, you
need to put their minds to sleep and heat up their senses. It is best
to lure them into lust by sending certain loaded signals that will get
under their skin and spread sexual desire like a poison (22: Use
physical lures). The moment to strike and move in for the kill is
when your victim is brimming with desire, but not consciously ex-
pecting the climax to come (23: Master the art of the bold move).
Once the seduction is over, there is the danger that disenchant-
ment will set in and ruin all your hard work (24: Beware the
aftereffects). If you are after a relationship, then you must con-
stantly re-seduce the victim, creating tension and releasing it. If
your victim is to be sacrificed, then it must be done swiftly and
cleanly, leaving you free (physically and psychologically) to move
on to the next victim. Then the game begins all over.

[PAGE 410]


[PAGE 411]
Give Them Space to Fall—
The Pursuer Is Pursued
If your targets become too used to you as the ag-
gressor, they will give less of their own energy, and the
tension will slacken. You need to wake them up, turn the
tables. Once they are under your spell, take a step back and
they will start to come after you. Begin with a touch of aloof-
ness, an unexpected nonappearance, a hint that you are grow-
ing bored. Stir the pot by seeming interested in someone else.
Make none of this explicit; let them only sense it and their
imagination will do the rest, creating the doubt you desire.
Soon they will want to possess you physically, and re-
straint will go out the window. The goal is to have them
fall into your arms of their own will. Create the
illusion that the seducer is being seduced.

[PAGE 412]


[PAGE 413]
Seductive Gravity
In the early 1840s, the center of attention in the French art world was a
young woman named Apollonie Sabatier. She was so much the natural
beauty that sculptors and painters vied to immortalize her in their works,
and she was also charming, easy to talk to, and seductively self-sufficient—
men were drawn to her. Her Paris apartment became a gathering spot for
writers and artists, and soon Madame Sabatier—as she came to be known, Omissions, denials,
although she was not married—was hosting one of the most important lit- deflections, deceptions,
diversions, and humility—
erary salons in France. Writers such as Gustave Flaubert, the elder Alexan-
all aimed at provoking this
dre Dumas, and Theophile Gautier were among her regular guests. second state, the secret of
Near the end of 1852, when she was thirty, Madame Sabatier received true seduction. Vulgar
seduction might proceed by
an anonymous letter. The writer confessed that he loved her deeply. Wor-
persistence, but true seduc-
ried that she would find his sentiments ridiculous, he would not reveal his
tion proceeds by absence. .
name; yet he had to let her know that he adored her. Sabatier was used to . . It is like fencing: one
such attentions—one man after another had fallen in love with her—but needs a field for the feint.
Throughout this period,
this letter was different: in this man she seemed to have inspired a quasi-
the seducer [Johannes], far
religious ardor. The letter, written in a disguised handwriting, contained a from seeking to close in on
poem dedicated to her; titled "To One Who Is Too Gay," it began by prais- her, seeks to maintain his
distance by various ploys:
ing her beauty, yet ended with the lines
he does not speak directly
to her but only to her aunt,
And so, one night, I'd like to sneak, and then about trivial or
stupid subjects; he neutral-
When darkness tolls the hour of pleasure,
izes everything by irony
A craven thief, toward the treasure and feigned pedanticism;
Which is your person, plump and sleek. . . . he fails to respond to any
feminine or erotic move-
And, most vertiginous delight!
ment, and even finds her a
Into those lips, so freshly striking
sitcom suitor to disenchant
And daily lovelier to my liking— and deceive her, to the
Infuse the venom of my spite. point where she herself
takes the initiative and
breaks off her engagement,
Mixed in with her admirer's adoration, clearly, was a strange kind of lust, thus completing the
with a touch of cruelty to it. The poem both intrigued and disturbed seduction and creating the
ideal situation for her total
her—and she had no idea who had written it.
abandon.
A few weeks later another letter arrived. As before, the writer en-
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
veloped Sabatier in cultlike worship, mixing the physical and the spiritual.
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY
And as before, there was a poem, "All in One," in which he wrote, BRIAN SINGER
385

[PAGE 414]
386 • The Art of Seduction
The rumor spread No single beauty is the best,
everywhere. It was even Since she is all one flower divine
told to the queen
O mystic metamorphosis!
[Guinevere], who was
seated at dinner. She My senses into one sense flow—
nearly killed herself when Her voice makes perfume when she speaks,
she heard the perfidious
Her breath is music faint and low!
rumor of Lancelot's death.
She thought it was true
and was so greatly Clearly the author was haunted by Sabatier's presence, and thought of her
perturbed that she was constantly—but now she began to be haunted by him, thinking of him
scarcely able to speak. . . .
night and day, and wondering who he was. His subsequent letters only
She arose at once from the
table, and was able to give deepened the spell. It was flattering to hear that he was enchanted by more
vent to her grief without than her beauty, yet also flattering to know that he was not immune to her
being noticed or overheard.
physical charms.
She was so crazed with the
thought of killing herself One day an idea occurred to Madame Sabatier as to who the writer
that she repeatedly grabbed might be: a young poet who had frequented her salon for several years,
at her throat. Yet first she
Charles Baudelaire. He seemed shy, in fact had hardly spoken to her, but
confessed in conscience,
she had read some of his poetry, and although the poems in the letters were
repented and asked God's
pardon; she accused herself more polished, the style was similar. At her apartment Baudelaire would al-
of having sinned against ways sit politely in a corner, but now that she thought of it, he would smile
the one she knew had
at her strangely, nervously. It was the look of a young man in love. Now
always been hers, and who
would still be, were he when he visited she watched him carefully, and the more she watched, the
alive. . . . She counted all surer she was that he was the writer, but she never confirmed her intuition,
of the unkindnesses and
because she did not want to confront him—he might be shy, but he was a
recalled each individual
unkindness; she noted man, and at some point he would have to come to her. And she felt certain
every one, and repeated that he would. Then, suddenly the letters stopped coming—and Madame
often: "Oh misery! What
Sabatier could not understand why, since the last one had been even more
was I thinking, when my
adoring than all of the others before.
lover came before me and I
did not deign to welcome Several years went by, in which she often thought of her anonymous
him, nor even care to
admirer's letters, but they were never renewed. In 1857, however, Baude-
listen! Was I not a fool to
laire published a book of poetry, The Flowers of Evil, and Madame Sabatier
refuse to speak or even look
at him? A fool? No, so recognized several of the verses—they were the ones he had written for
help me God, I was cruel her. Now they were out in the open for everyone to see. A little while later
and deceitful! ... 7 believe
the poet sent her a gift: a specially bound copy of the book, and a letter,
that it was I alone who
struck him that mortal this time signed with his name. Yes, he wrote, he was the anonymous
blow. When he came writer—would she forgive him for being so mysterious in the past?
happily before me expecting
Furthermore, his feelings for her were as strong as ever: "You didn't think
me to receive him joyfully
and I shunned him and for a moment that I could have forgotten you? . . . You to me are more
would never even look at than a cherished image conjured up in dream, you're my superstition . . .
him, was this not a mortal
my constant companion, my secret! Farewell, dear Madame. I kiss your
blow? At that moment,
hands with profound devotion."
when I refused to speak, I
believe I severed both his This letter had a stronger effect on Madame Sabatier than the others
heart and his life. Those
had. Perhaps it was his childlike sincerity, and the fact that he had finally
two blows killed him, I
written to her directly; perhaps it was that he loved her but asked nothing
think, and not any hired
killers. • "Ah God! Will I of her, unlike all the other men she knew who at some point had always
be forgiven this murder, this turned out to want something. Whatever it was, she had an uncontrollable
sin? Never! All the rivers
desire to see him. The next day she invited him to her apartment, alone.

[PAGE 415]
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 387
Baudelaire appeared at the appointed hour. He sat nervously in his seat, and the seas will dry up
gazing at her with his large eyes, saying little, and what he did say was for- first! Oh, misery! How it
would have brought me
mal and polite. He seemed aloof. After he left a kind of panic seized
comfort and healing if I
Madame Sabatier, and the next day she wrote him a first letter of her own: had held him in my arms
"Today I'm more calm, and I can feel more clearly the impression of our once before he died. How?
Yes, quite naked next to
Tuesday evening together. I can tell you, without the danger of your think-
him, in order to enjoy him
ing I'm exaggerating, that I'm the happiest woman on the face of the earth,
fully. ..."•.. . When
that I've never felt more truly that I love you, and that I've never seen you they came within six or
look more beautiful, more adorable, my divine friend!" seven leagues of the castle
where King Bademagu was
Madame Sabatier had never before written such a letter; she had always
staying, news that was
been the one who was pursued. Now she had lost her usual self-possession. pleasing came to him about
And it only got worse: Baudelaire did not answer right away. When she saw Lancelot—news that he
was glad to hear; Lancelot
him next, he was colder than before. She had the feeling there was some-
was alive and was
one else, that his old mistress, Jeanne Duval, had suddenly reappeared in his returning, hale and hearty.
life and was pulling him away from her. One night she turned aggressive, He behaved most properly
in going to inform the
embracing him, trying to kiss him, but he did not respond, and quickly
queen. "Good sir," she
found an excuse to leave. Why was he suddenly inaccessible? She began to told him, "I believe it,
flood him with letters, begging him to come to her. Unable to sleep, she since you have told me.
would wait all night for him to show up. She had never experienced such But were he dead, I assure
you that I could never
desperation. Somehow she had to seduce him, possess him, have him all
again be happy."
to herself. She tried everything—letters, coquetry, all kinds of promises— •... Now Lancelot had
until he finally wrote that he was no longer in love with her and that was his every wish: the queen
willingly sought his
that.
company and affection as
he held her in his arms and
she held him in hers. Her
love-play seemed so gentle
Interpretation. Baudelaire was an intellectual seducer. He wanted to over-
and good to him, both her
whelm Madame Sabatier with words, dominate her thoughts, make her fall kisses and caresses, that in
in love with him. Physically, he knew, he could not compete with her truth the two of them felt a
joy and wonder of which
many other admirers—he was shy, awkward, not particularly handsome. So
has never been heard or
he resorted to his one strength, poetry. Haunting her with anonymous let-
known. But I shall let it
ters gave him a perverse thrill. He had to know she would realize, eventu- remain a secret for ever,
ally, that he was her correspondent—no one else wrote like him—but he since it should not be
written of: the most
wanted her to figure this out on her own. He stopped writing to her be-
delightful and choicest
cause he had become interested in someone else, but he knew she would be pleasure is that which is
thinking of him, wondering, perhaps waiting for him. And when he pub- hinted at, but never told.
lished his book, he decided to write to her again, this time directly, stirring —CHRÉTIEN DE TROYES,
up the old venom he had injected in her. When they were alone, he could ARTHURIAN ROMANCES,
TRANSLATED BY WILLIAM W.
see she was waiting for him to do something, to take hold of her, but he
KIBLER
was not that kind of seducer. Besides, it gave him pleasure to hold himself
back, to sense his power over a woman whom so many desired. By the time
she turned physical and aggressive, the seduction was over for him. He had
He was sometimes so
made her fall in love; that was enough.
intellectual that I felt
The devastating effect of Baudelaire's push-and-pull on Madame myself annihilated as a
Sabatier teaches us a great lesson in seduction. First, it is always best to keep woman; at other times
he was so wild and
at some distance from your targets. You do not have to go as far as remain-
passionate, so desiring,
ing anonymous, but you do not want to be seen too often, or to be seen as that I almost trembled

[PAGE 416]
388 • The Art of Seduction
before him. At times I was intrusive. If you are always in their face, always the aggressor, they will be-
like a stranger to him; at come used to being passive, and the tension in your seduction will flag. Use
times he surrendered
letters to make them think about you all the time, to feed their imagina-
completely. Then when I
threw my arms around tion. Cultivate mystery—stop them from figuring you out. Baudelaire's let-
him, everything changed, ters were delightfully ambiguous, mixing the physical and the spiritual,
and I embraced a cloud.
teasing Sabatier with their multiplicity of possible interpretations.
—CORDELIA DESCRIBING Then, at the point when they are ripe with desire and interest, when
JOHANNES, IN SØREN
perhaps they are expecting you to make a move—as Madame Sabatier ex-
KIERKEGAARD, THE SEDUCER'S
DIARY, TRANSLATED BY HOWARD pected that day in her apartment—take a step back. You are unexpectedly
V. HONG AND EDNA V. HONG distant, friendly but no more than that—certainly not sexual. Let this sink
in for a day or two. Your withdrawal will trigger anxiety; the only way to
relieve this anxiety is to pursue and possess you. Step back now and you
It is true that we could not make your targets fall into your arms like ripe fruit, blind to the force of
love if there were not some gravity that is drawing them to you. The more they participate, the more
memory in us—to the
their willpower is engaged, the deeper the erotic effect. You have chal-
greatest extent an
lenged them to use their own seductive powers on you, and when they re-
unconscious memory—that
we were once loved. But spond, the tables will turn and they will pursue you with desperate energy.
neither could we love if this
feeling of being loved had
/ retreat and thereby teach her to be victorious as she pur-
not at some time suffered
doubt; if we had always sues me. I continually fall back, and in this backward
been sure of it. In other movement I teach her to know through me all the powers of
words, love would not be erotic love, its turbulent thoughts, its passion, what longing
possible without having
is, and hope, and impatient expectancy.
been loved and then having
missed the certainty of
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
being loved. . . . • The
need to be loved is not
elementary. This need is
Keys to Seduction
certainly acquired by
experience in later
childhood. It would be
better to say: by many Since humans are naturally obstinate and willful creatures, and prone to
experiences or by a suspicions of people's motives, it is only natural, in the course of any se-
repetition of similar ones. I
duction, that in some ways your target will resist you. Seductions, then, are
believe that these
rarely easy or without setbacks. But once your victims overcome some of
experiences are of a
negative kind. The child their doubts, and begin to fall under your spell, they will reach a point
becomes aware that he is where they start to let go. They may sense that you are leading them along,
not loved or that his
but they are enjoying it. No one likes things to be complicated and diffi-
mother's love is not
unconditional. The baby cult, and your target will expect the conclusion to come quickly. That is
learns that his mother can the point, however, where you must train yourself to hold back. Deliver
be dissatisfied with him,
the pleasurable climax they are so greedily awaiting, succumb to the natural
that she can withdraw her
affection if he does not tendency to bring the seduction to a rapid end, and you will have missed an
behave as she wishes, that opportunity to ratchet up the tension, to make the affair more heated. After
she can be angry or cross. I
all, you don't want a passive little victim to toy with; you want the seduced
believe that this experience
to engage their will in all its force, to become active participants in the se-
arouses feelings of anxiety
in the infant. The duction. You want them to pursue you, hopelessly ensnaring themselves in
possibility of losing his your web in the process. The only way to accomplish this is to take a step
mother's love certainly
back and make them anxious.
strikes the child with a
force which can no more be You have strategically retreated before (see chapter 12), but this is dif-

[PAGE 417]
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 389
ferent. The target is falling for you now, and your retreat will lead to pan-
coped with than an
icky thoughts: you are losing interest, it is somehow my fault, perhaps it is earthquake. . . . • The
something I have done. Rather than think you are rejecting them on your child who experiences his
mother's dissatisfaction and
own, your targets will want to make this interpretation, since if the cause of
apparent withdrawal of
the problem is something they have done, they have the power to win you affection reacts to this
back by changing their behavior. If you are simply rejecting them, on the menace at first with fear. He
tries to regain what seems
other hand, they have no control. People always want to preserve hope.
lost by expressing hostility
Now they will come to you, turn aggressive, thinking that will do the trick. and aggressiveness. . . .
They will raise the erotic temperature. Understand: a person's willpower is The change of its character
comes about only after
directly linked to their libido, their erotic desire. When your victims are
failure; when the child
passively waiting for you, their erotic level is low. When they turn pursuer, realizes that the effort is a
getting involved in the process, brimming with tension and anxiety, the failure. And now
something very strange
temperature is raised. So raise it as high as you can.
takes place, something
When you withdraw, make it subtle; you are instilling unease. Your
which is foreign to our
coldness or distance should dawn on your targets when they are alone, in conscious thinking but
the form of a poisonous doubt creeping into their mind. Their paranoia which is very near to the
infantile way. Instead of
will become self-generating. Your subtle step back will make them want to
grasping the object directly
possess you, so they will willingly advance into your arms without being and taking possession of it
pushed. This is different from the strategy in chapter 20, in which you are in an aggressive way, the
child identifies with the
inflicting deep wounds, creating a pattern of pain and pleasure. There the
object as it was before. The
goal is to make your victims weak and dependent, here it is to make them child does the same that
active and aggressive. Which strategy you prefer to use (the two cannot be the mother did to him in
that happy time which has
combined) depends on what you want and the proclivities of your victim.
passed. The process is very
In Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, Johannes aims to seduce the illuminating because it
young and beautiful Cordelia. He begins by being rather intellectual with shapes the pattern of love
in general. The little boy
her, and slowly intriguing her. Then he sends her letters that are romantic
thus demonstrates in his
and seductive. Now her fascination blossoms into love. Although in person own behavior what he
he remains a little distant, she senses in him great depths and is certain that wants his mother to do to
he loves her. Then one day, while they're talking, Cordelia has a strange him, how she should
behave to him. He
sensation: something about him is different. He seems more interested in
announces this wish by
ideas than in her. Over the next few days, this doubt gets stronger—the let- displaying his tenderness
ters are a little less romantic, something is missing. Feeling anxious, she and affection toward his
mother who gave these
slowly turns aggressive, becomes the pursuer instead of the pursued. The
before to him. It is an
seduction is now much more exciting, at least for Johannes. attempt to overcome the
Johannes's step back is subtle; he merely gives Cordelia the impression despair and sense of loss in
taking over the role of the
that his interest is a little less romantic than the day before. He returns to
mother. The boy tries to
being the intellectual. This stirs the worrisome thought that her natural demonstrate what he
charms and beauty no longer have as much effect on him. She must try wishes by doing it himself:
look, I would like you to
harder, provoke him sexually, prove to herself that she has some power over
act thus toward me, to be
him. She is now brimming with erotic desire, brought to that point by Jo- thus tender and loving to
hannes's subtle withdrawal of affection. me. Of course this attitude
Each gender has its own seductive lures, which come naturally to them. is not the result of
consideration or reasoned
When you seem interested in someone but do not respond sexually, it is
planning but an emotional
disturbing, and presents a challenge: they will find a way to seduce you. To process by identification, a
produce this effect, first reveal an interest in your targets, through letters or natural exchange of roles
with the unconscious aim
subtle insinuation. But when you are in their presence, assume a kind of

[PAGE 418]
390 • The Art of Seduction
of seducing the mother into sexless neutrality. Be friendly, even warm, but no more. You are pushing
fulfilling his wish. He them into arming themselves with the seductive charms that are natural to
demonstrates by his own
their sex—exactly what you want.
actions how he wants to be
loved. It is a primitive In the latter stages of the seduction, let your targets feel that you are be-
presentation through coming interested in another person—this is another form of taking a step
reversal, an example of
back. When Napoleon Bonaparte first met the young widow Josephine de
how to do the thing which
Beauharnais in 1795, he was excited by her exotic beauty and the looks she
he wishes done by her. In
this presentation lives the gave him. He began to attend her weekly soirees and, to his delight, she
memory of the attentions, would ignore the other men and remain at his side, listening to him so at-
tendernesses, and
tentively. He found himself falling in love with Josephine, and had every
endearments once received
from the mother or reason to believe she felt the same.
loving persons. Then, at one soiree, she was friendly and attentive, as usual—except
—THEODOR REIK, that she was equally friendly to another man there, a former aristocrat, like
OF LOVE AND LUST Josephine, the kind of man that Napoleon could never compete with when
it came to manners and wit. Doubts and jealousies began to stir within. As
a military man, he knew the value of going on the offensive, and after a few
weeks of a swift and aggressive campaign he had her all to himself, eventu-
ally marrying her. Of course Josephine, a clever seductress, had set it all up.
She did not say she was interested in another man, but his mere presence
at her house, a look here and there, subtle gestures, made it seem that way.
There is no more powerful way to hint that you are losing your desire. Make
your interest in another too obvious, though, and it could backfire. This is
not the situation in which you want to seem cruel; doubt and anxiety
are the effects you are after. Make your possible interest in another barely
perceptible to the naked eye.
Once someone has fallen for you, any physical absence will create un-
ease. You are literally creating space. The Russian seductress Lou Andreas-
Salomé had an intense presence; when a man was with her, he felt her eyes
boring into him, and often became entranced with her coquettish ways and
spirit. But then, almost invariably, something would come up—she would
have to leave town for a while, or would be too busy to see him. It was
during her absences that men fell hopelessly in love with her, and vowed to
be more aggressive next time they were with her. Your absences at this
latter point of the seduction should seem at least somewhat justified. You
are insinuating not a blatant brush-off but a slight doubt: perhaps you
could have found some reason to stay, perhaps you are losing interest, per-
haps there is someone else. In your absence, their appreciation of you will
grow. They will forget your faults, forgive your sins. The moment you re-
turn, they will chase after you as you desire. It will be as if you had come
back from the dead.
According to the psychologist Theodor Reik, we learn to love only
through rejection. As infants, we are showered with love by our mother—
we know nothing else. But when we get a little older, we begin to sense
that her love is not unconditional. If we do not behave, if we do not please
her, she can withdraw it. The idea that she will withdraw her affection fills
us with anxiety, and, at first, with anger—we will show her, we will throw

[PAGE 419]
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 391
a tantrum. But that never works, and we slowly realize that the only way to
keep her from rejecting us again is to imitate her—to be as loving, kind,
and affectionate as she is. This will bond her to us in the deepest way. The
pattern is ingrained in us for the rest of our lives: by experiencing a rejec-
tion or a coldness, we learn to court and pursue, to love.
Re-create this primal pattern in your seduction. First, shower your tar-
gets with affection. They will not be sure where this is coming from, but it
is a delightful feeling, and they will never want to lose it. When it does go
away, in your strategic step back, they will have moments of anxiety and
anger, perhaps throwing a tantrum, and then the same childlike reaction:
the only way to win you back, to have you for sure, will be to reverse the
pattern, to imitate you, to be the affectionate, giving one. It is the terror of
rejection that turns the tables.
This pattern will often repeat itself naturally in an affair or relationship.
One person goes cold, the other pursues, then goes cold in turn, making
the first person the pursuer, and on and on. As a seducer, do not leave this
to chance. Make it happen. You are teaching the other person to become a
seducer, just as the mother in her own way taught the child to return her
love by turning her back. For your own sake learn to relish this reversal of
roles. Do not merely play at being the pursued, but enjoy it, give in to it.
The pleasure of being pursued by your victim can often surpass the thrill of
the hunt.
Symbol: The
Pomegranate. Carefully cultivated and
tended, the pomegranate begins to ripen. Do not
gather it too early or force it off the stem—it will be hard and
bitter. Let the fruit grow heavy and full of juice, then stand back—
it will fall on its own. That is when its pulp is most delicious.

[PAGE 420]
392 • The Art of Seduction
Reversal
There are moments when creating space and absence will blow up in
your face. An absence at a critical moment in the seduction can make
the target lose interest in you. It also leaves too much to chance—while you
are away, they could find another person, who will distract their thoughts
from you. Cleopatra easily seduced Mark Antony, but after their first en-
counters, he returned to Rome. Cleopatra was mysterious and alluring, but
if she let too much time pass, he would forget her charms. So she let go of
her usual coquetry and came after him when he was on one of his military
campaigns. She knew that once he saw her, he would fall under her spell
again and pursue her.
Use absence only when you are sure of the target's affection, and never
let it go on too long. It is most effective later in the seduction. Also, never
create too much space—don't write too rarely, don't act too cold, don't
show too much interest in someone else. That is the strategy of mixing
pleasure with pain, detailed in chapter 20, and will create a dependent vic-
tim, or will even make him or her give up completely. Some people, too,
are inveterately passive: they are waiting for you to make the bold move,
and if you don't, they will think you are weak. The pleasure to be had from
such a victim is less than the pleasure you will get from someone more ac-
tive. But if you are involved with such a type, do what you need to if you
are to have your way, then end the affair and move on.

[PAGE 421]
Use Physical Lures
Targets with active minds
are dangerous: if they see through your
manipulations, they may suddenly develop
doubts. Put their minds gently to rest, and waken
their dormant senses, by combining a nondefen-
sive attitude with a charged sexual presence.
While your cool, nonchalant air is calming
their minds and lowering their inhibitions,
your glances, voice, and bearing—oozing sex
and desire—are getting under their skin, agi-
tating their senses and raising their temperature.
Never force the physical; instead infect your targets
with heat, lure them into lust. Lead them into the
moment—an intensified present in which mo-
rality, judgment, and concern for the fu-
ture all melt away and the body
succumbs to pleasure.

[PAGE 422]


[PAGE 423]
Raising the Temperature
In 1889, the top New York theatrical manager Ernest Jurgens visited
France on one of his many scouting trips. Jurgens was known for his
honesty, a rare commodity in the shady entertainment world, and for
his ability to find unusual acts. He had to spend the night in Marseilles, and
while wandering along the quay of the old harbor, he heard excited catcalls
issuing from a working-class cabaret, and decided to go in. A twenty-one-
The year was 1907 and
year-old Spanish dancer named Caroline Otero was performing, and the La Belle [Otero], by then,
minute Jurgens laid eyes on her he was a changed man. Her appearance was had been an international
figure for over a dozen
startling—five foot ten, fiery dark eyes, black waist-length hair, her body
years. The story was told
corseted into a perfect hourglass figure. But it was the way she danced that by M. Maurice Chevalier.
made his heart pound—her whole body alive, writhing like an animal in • "I was a young star
about to make my first
heat, as she performed a fandango. Her dancing was hardly professional, but
appearance at the Folies.
she enjoyed herself so much and was so unrestrained that none of that mat- Otero had been the
tered. Jurgens also could not help but notice the men in the cabaret watch- headliner there for several
weeks and although I
ing her, their mouths agape.
knew who she was I had
After the show, Jurgens went backstage to introduce himself. Otero's never seen her before on
eyes came alive as he spoke of his job and of New York. He felt a heat, astage or off • "I was
twitching, in his body as she looked him up and down. Her voice was deep scurrying along, head bent,
thinking of something or
and raspy, the tongue constantly in play as she rolled her Rs. Closing the
other, when I looked up.
door, Otero ignored the knocks and pleas of the admirers dying to speak to There was La Belle, in the
her. She said that her way of dancing was natural—her mother was a gypsy, company of another
woman, walking in my
Soon she asked Jurgens to be her escort that evening, and as he helped her
direction. Otero was then
with her coat, she leaned back toward him slightly, as if she had lost her nearly forty and I was not
balance. As they walked around the city, her arm in his, she would occa- yet out of my teens but—
ah!—she was so beautiful!
sionally whisper in his ear. Jurgens felt his usual reserve melt away. He held
• "She was tall, dark-
her tighter. He was a family man, had never considered cheating on his haired, with a magnificent
wife, but without thinking, he brought Otero back to his hotel room. She body, like the bodies of the
began to take off some of her clothes—coat, gloves, hat—a perfectly nor- women of those days, not
like the lightweight ones of
mal thing to do, but the way she did it made him lose all restraint. The nor-
today." • Chevalier smiled.
mally timid Jurgens went on the attack. • "Of course I like modern
The next morning Jurgens signed Otero to a lucrative contract—a great women, too, but there was
something of a fatal charm
risk, considering that she was an amateur at best. He brought her to Paris
about Otero. We three
and assigned a top theatrical coach to her. Hurrying back to New York, he stood there for a moment or
fed the newspapers with reports of this mysterious Spanish beauty poised to two, not saying a word, I
staring at La Belle, not so
conquer the city. Soon rival papers were claiming she was an Andalusian
young as she once was and
countess, an escaped harem girl, the widow of a sheik, on and on. He maybe not so beautiful, but
395

[PAGE 424]
396 • The Art of Seduction
still quite a woman. • made frequent trips to Paris to be with her, forgetting about his family, lav-
"She looked right at me, ishing money and gifts on her.
then turned to the lady she
Otero's New York debut, in October of 1890, was an astounding suc-
was with—some friend, I
guess—and spoke to her in cess. "Otero dances with abandon," read an article in The New York Times.
English, which she thought "Her lithe and supple body looks like that of a serpent writhing in quick,
I didn't understand.
graceful curves." In a few short weeks she became the toast of New York
However, I did. •
society, performing at private parties late into the night. The tycoon Wil-
" 'Who's the very
handsome young man?' liam Vanderbilt courted her with expensive jewels and evenings on his
Otero asked. • "The other yacht. Other millionaires vied for her attention. Meanwhile Jurgens was
one answered, 'He's
dipping into the company till to pay for presents for her—he would do
Chevalier.' • " 'He has
such beautiful eyes' ha anything to keep her, a task in which he was facing heavy competition. A
Belle said, looking straight few months later, after his embezzling became public, he was a ruined man.
at me, right up and down.
He eventually committed suicide.
• "Then she almost floored
me with her frankness. • Otero went back to France, to Paris, and over the next few years rose to
" 'I wonder if he'd like to become the most infamous courtesan of the Belle Epoque. Word spread
go to bed with me. I think
quickly: a night with La Belle Otero (as she was now known) was more ef-
I'll ask him!' Only she
fective than all the aphrodisiacs in the world. She had a temper, and was de-
didn't say it so delicately.
She was much cruder and manding, but that was to be expected. Prince Albert of Monaco, a man
more to the point. • "It who had been plagued by doubts of his virility, felt like an insatiable tiger
was at this moment I had
after a night with Otero. She became his mistress. Other royalty followed—
to make up my mind
rather quickly. La Belle Prince Albert of Wales (later King Edward VII), the Shah of Persia, Grand
moved toward me. Instead Duke Nicholas of Russia. Less wealthy men emptied their bank accounts,
of introducing myself and
and Jurgens was only the first of many whom Otero drove to suicide.
succumbing to the
consequences, I pretended I During World War I, a twenty-nine-year-old American soldier named
didn't understand what Frederick, stationed in France, won $37,000 in a four-day crap game. On
she'd said, uttered some
his next leave he went to Nice and checked himself into the finest hotel.
pleasantry in French and
On his first night in the hotel restaurant, he recognized Otero sitting alone
moved away to my dressing
room. • "I could see La at a table. He had seen her perform in Paris ten years before, and had be-
Belle smile in an odd come obsessed with her. She was now close to fifty, but was more alluring
fashion as I passed her;
than ever. He greased some palms and was able to sit at her table. He could
like a sleek tigress watching
its dinner go away. For a hardly talk: the way her eyes bored into him, a simple readjustment in her
fleeting second I thought chair, her body brushing up against him as she got up, the way she managed
she might turn around and
to walk in front of him and display herself. Later, strolling along a boule-
follow me. " • What would
Chevalier have done had vard, they passed a jewelry store. He went inside, and moments later found
she pursued him? His himself plopping down $31,000 for a diamond necklace. For three nights
lower lip dropped into that
La Belle Otero was his. Never in his life had he felt so masculine and im-
half pout which is the
petuous. Years later, he still believed it was well worth the price he had
Frenchman's exclusive
possession. Then he paid.
grinned. • "I'd have
slowed down and let her
catch up."
Interpretation. Although La Belle Otero was beautiful, hundreds of
—ARTHUR H. LEWIS,
women were more so, or were more charming and talented. But Otero was
LA BELLE OTERO
constantly on fire. Men could read it in her eyes, the way her body moved,
a dozen other signs. The heat that radiated out from her came from her
own inner desires: she was insatiably sexual. But she was also a practiced
and calculating courtesan, and knew how to put her sexuality to effect.

[PAGE 425]
Use Physical Lures • 397
Onstage she made every man in the audience come alive, abandoning her- You're anxiously expecting
self in dance. In person she was cooler, or slightly so. A man likes to feel me to escort you \ To
parties: here too solicit my
that a woman is enflamed not because she has an insatiable appetite but be-
advice. \ Arrive late, when
cause of him; so Otero personalized her sexuality, using glances, a brushing the lamps are lit; make a
of skin, a more languorous tone of voice, a saucy comment, to suggest that graceful entrance— \ Delay
enhances charm, delay's a
the man was heating her up. In her memoirs she revealed that Prince Albert
great bawd. \ Plain you
was a most inept lover. Yet he believed, along with many other men, that
may be, but at night you'll
with her he was Hercules himself. Her sexuality actually originated from look fine to the tipsy: \
her, but she created the illusion that the man was the aggressor. Soft lights and shadows
will mask your faults. \
The key to luring the target into the final act of your seduction is not
Take your food with dainty
to make it obvious, not to announce that you are ready (to pounce or be fingers: good table manners
pounced upon). Everything should be geared, not to the conscious mind, matter: \ Don't besmear
your whole face with a
but to the senses. You want your target to read cues not from your words or
greasy paw. \ Don't cat
actions but from your body. You must make your body glow with desire— first at home, and nibble—
for the target. Your desire should be read in your eyes, in a trembling in but equally, don't indulge
your \ Appetite to the full,
your voice, in your reaction when your bodies draw near.
leave something in hand. \
You cannot train your body to act this way, but by choosing a victim If Paris saw Helen stuffing
(see chapter 1) who has this effect on you, it will all flow naturally. During herself to the eyeballs \
He'd detest her, he'd feel
the seduction, you will have had to hold yourself back, to intrigue and
her abduction had been \ A
frustrate the victim. You will have frustrated yourself in the process, and
stupid mistake. . . . \ Each
will already be champing at the bit. Once you sense that the target has woman should know
fallen for you and cannot turn back, let those frustrated desires course herself, pick methods \ To
suit her body: one fashion .
through your blood and warm you up. You do not need to touch your tar-
won't do for all. \ Let the
gets, or become physical. As La Belle Otero understood, sexual desire is girl with a pretty face lie
contagious. They will catch your heat and glow in return. Let them make supine, let the lady \ Who
boasts a good back be
the first move. It will cover your tracks. The second and third moves are
viewed \ From behind.
yours. Milanion bore Atalanta's
legs on \ His shoulders:
nice legs should always be
Spell SEX with capital letters when you talk about Otero.
used this way \ The petite
She exuded it.
should ride a horse
(Andromache, Hector's
—MAURICE CHEVALIER
Theban \ Bride, was too
tall for these games: no
jockey she); \ If you 're
Lowering Inhibitions
built like a fashion model,
with a willowy figure, \
One day in 1931, in a village in New Guinea, a young girl named Tu- Then kneel on the bed,
your neck \ A little arched;
perselai heard some happy news: her father, Allaman, who had left the girl who has perfect legs
some months before to work on a tobacco plantation, had returned for a and bosom \ Should lie
sideways on, and make her
visit. Tuperselai ran to greet him. Accompanying her father was a white
lover stand. \ Don't blush
man, an unusual sight in these parts. He was a twenty-two-year-old Aus- to unbind your hair like
tralian from Tasmania, and he was the owner of the plantation. His name some ecstatic maenad \
was Errol Flynn. And tumble long tresses
about \ Your uncurved
Flynn smiled warmly at Tuperselai, seeming particularly interested in
throat.
her bare breasts. (As was the custom in New Guinea then, she wore only a
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
grass skirt.) He said in pidgin English how beautiful she was, and kept re-
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
peating her name, which he pronounced remarkably well. He did not say

[PAGE 426]
398 • The Art of Seduction
"How do you attract a much else, mind you—he did not speak her language—so she said goodbye
man," the Paris and walked away with her father. But later that day she discovered, to her
correspondent of the
dismay, that Mr. Flynn had taken a liking to her and had purchased her
Stockholm Aftonbladet
asked La Belle on July 3, from her father for two pigs, some English coins, and some seashell money.
1910. • "Make yourself The family was poor and the father liked the price. Tuperselai had a
as feminine as possible;
boyfriend in the village whom she did not want to leave, but she did not
dress so that the most
dare disobey her father, and she left with Mr. Flynn for the tobacco planta-
interesting portions of your
anatomy are emphasized; tion. On the other hand, she had no intention of being friendly with this
and subtly allow the man, from whom she expected the worst kind of treatment.
gentleman to know you are
In the first few days, Tuperselai missed her village terribly, and felt ner-
willing to yield at the
proper time. . . ." • "The vous and out of sorts. But Mr. Flynn was polite, and talked in a soothing
way to hold a man" Otero voice. She began to relax, and since he kept his distance, she decided it was
revealed a little later to a
safe to approach him. His white skin was tasty to the mosquitoes, so she be-
staff writer from the
Johannesburg Morning gan to wash him every night with scented bush herbs to keep them away.
Journal, "is to keep acting Soon she had a thought: Mr. Flynn was lonely, and wanted a companion.
as though every time you
That was why he had bought her. At night he usually read; instead, she be-
meet him you are overcome
gan to entertain him by singing and dancing. Sometimes he tried to com-
with fresh enthusiasm and,
with barely restrained municate in words and gestures, struggling in pidgin. She had no idea what
eagerness, you await his he was trying to say, but he made her laugh. And one day she did under-
impetuosity."
stand something: the word "swim." He was inviting her to go swimming
—ARTHUR H. LEWIS, with him in the Laloki River. She was happy to go along, but the river was
LA BELLE OTERO
full of crocodiles, so she brought along her spear just in case.
At the sight of the river, Mr. Flynn seemed to come alive—he tore off
his clothes and dove in. She followed and swam after him. He put his arms
"I missed the mental
around her and kissed her. They drifted downstream, and she clung to him.
stimulation when I was
She had forgotten about the crocodiles; she had also forgotten about her fa-
younger," he answered.
"But from the time I began ther, her boyfriend, her village, and everything else there was to forget.
to have women, shall we Around a bend of the river, he picked her up and carried her to a secluded
say, on the assembly-line
grove near the river's edge. It all happened rather suddenly, which was fine
basis, I discovered that the
only thing you need, want, with Tuperselai. From then on this was a daily ritual—the river, the
or should have is the grove—until the time came when the tobacco plantation was no longer
absolutely physical. Simply
doing so well, and Mr. Flynn left New Guinea.
the physical. No mind at
all. A woman's mind will One day some ten years later, a young girl named Blanca Rosa Welter
get in the way." • "Really?" went to a party at the Ritz Hotel in Mexico City. As she wandered through
• "For me . . . I am
the bar, looking for her friends, a tall older man blocked her path and said
speaking of myself. I don't
in a charming accent, "You must be Blanca Rosa." He did not have to in-
speak for male humankind.
I am speaking for what I've troduce himself—he was the famous Hollywood actor Errol Flynn. His
discovered or what I need: face was plastered on posters everywhere, and he was friends of the party's
the body, the face, the
hosts, the Davises, and had heard them praise the beauty of Blanca Rosa,
physical motion, the voice,
the femaleness, the female who was turning eighteen the following day. He led her to a table in the
presence . . . totally that, corner. His manner was graceful and confident, and listening to him talk,
nothing else. That's the
she forgot about her friends. He spoke of her beauty, repeated her name,
best. There's no
possessiveness in that." said he could make her a star. Before she knew what was happening, he had
• I watched him closely. • invited her to join him in Acapulco, where he was vacationing. The
"I'm serious," he said.
Davises, their mutual friends, could come along as chaperones. That would
"That's my view and
be wonderful, she said, but her mother would never agree. Don't worry
feeling. Just the elementary

[PAGE 427]
Use Physical Lures • 399
about that, Flynn replied; and the following day he showed up at their physical female. Nothing
house with a beautiful gift for Blanca, a ring with her birthstone. Melting more than that. When you
get hold of that—hang on
under his charming smile, Blanca's mother agreed to his plan. Later that
to it, for a short while."
day, Blanca found herself on a plane to Acapulco. It was all like a dream.
—EARL CONRAD,
The Davises, under orders from Blanca's mother, tried not to let her
ERROL FLYNN: A MEMOIR
out of their sight, so Flynn put her on a raft and they drifted out into the
ocean, far from the shore. His flattering words filled her ears, and she let
him hold her hand and kiss her cheek. That night they danced together,
A sweet disorder in the
and when the evening was over he escorted her to her room and serenaded dress \ Kindles in clothes a
her with a song as they finally parted. It was the end of a perfect day. In the wantonness: \ A lawn
about the shoulders thrown
middle of the night, she woke up to hear him calling her name, from her
\ Into a fine distraction: \
hotel-room balcony. How had he gotten there? His room was a floor
An erring lace, which here
above; he must have somehow jumped or swung down, a dangerous ma- and there \ Enthralls the
neuver. She approached, not at all afraid, but curious. He pulled her gently crimson stomacher: \ A cuff
neglectful, and thereby \
into his arms and kissed her. Her body convulsed; overwhelmed with new
Ribbands to flow
sensations, totally at sea, she began to cry—out of happiness, she said. confusedly: \ A winning
Flynn comforted her with a kiss and returned to his room above, in the wave (deserving note) \ In
the tempestuous petticoat: \
same inexplicable way he had arrived. Now Blanca was hopelessly in love
A careless shoestring, in
with him and would do anything he asked of her. A few weeks later, in whose tie \ I see a wild
fact, she followed him to Hollywood, where she went on to become a suc- civility: \ Do more bewitch
me, than when art \ Is too
cessful actress, known as Linda Christian.
precise in every part.
In 1942, an eighteen-year-old girl named Nora Eddington had a tem-
—ROBERT HERRICK,"DELIGHT
porary job selling cigarettes at the Los Angeles County courthouse. The
IN DISORDER," QUOTED IN
place was a madhouse at the time, teeming with tabloid journalists: two PETER WASHINGTON, ED.,
young girls had charged Errol Flynn with rape. Nora of course noticed EROTIC POEMS
Flynn, a tall, dashing man who occasionally bought cigarettes from her, but
her thoughts were with her boyfriend, a young Marine. A few weeks later
Flynn was acquitted, the trial ended, and the place settled down. A man she Satni, the son of Pharaoh
Usimares, saw a very
had met during the trial called her up one day: he was Flynn's right-hand
beautiful woman on the
man, and on Flynn's behalf, he wanted to invite her up to the actor's house plain-stones of the temple.
on Mulholland Drive. Nora had no interest in Flynn, and in fact she was a He called his page, and
said, "Go and tell her that
little afraid of him, but a girlfriend who was dying to meet him talked her
I, Pharaoh's son, shall give
into going and bringing her along. What did she have to lose? Nora agreed her ten pieces of gold to
to go. On the day, Flynn's friend showed up and drove them to a splendid spend an hour with me."
"I am a Pure One, I am
house on top of a hill. When they arrived, Flynn was standing shirtless by
not a low person," answers
his swimming pool. He came to greet her and her girlfriend, moving so
the Lady Thubuit. "If you
gracefully—like a lithe cat—and his manner so relaxed, she felt her jitters wish to have your pleasure
melt away. He gave them a tour of the house, which was full of artifacts of with me, you will come to
my house at Bubastis.
his various sea voyages. He talked so delightfully of his love of adventure
Everything will be ready
that she wished she had had adventures of her own. He was the perfect there." Satni went to
gentleman, and even let her talk about her boyfriend without the slightest Bubastis by boat. "By my
life," said Thubuit, "come
sign of jealousy.
upstairs with me." On the
Nora had a visit from her boyfriend the next day. Somehow he didn't upper floor, sanded with
seem so interesting anymore; they had a fight and broke up on the spot. dust of lapis lazuli and
turquoise, Satni saw
That night, Flynn took her out on the town, to the famous Mocambo
several beds covered with
nightclub. He was drinking and joking, and she fell into the spirit, and hap- royal linen and many gold

[PAGE 428]
400 • The Art of Seduction
bowls on a table. "Please pily let him touch her hand. Then suddenly she panicked. "I'm a Catholic
take your meal," said and a virgin," she blurted out, "and some day I'm going to walk down the
Thubuit. "That is not
church aisle wearing a veil—and if you think you're going to sleep with
what I have come to do,"
answered Satni, while the me, you're mistaken." Totally calm and unruffled, Flynn said she had noth-
slaves put aromatic wood ing to fear. He simply liked being with her. She relaxed, and politely asked
on the fire and scattered
him to put his hand back. Over the next few weeks she saw him almost
scent about. "Do that for
every day. She became his secretary. Soon she was spending weekend nights
which we have come here,"
Satni repeated. "First you as his house guest. He took her on skiing and boating trips. He remained
will make out a deed for the perfect gentleman, but when he looked at her or touched her hand, she
my maintenance," Thubuit
felt overwhelmed by an exhilarating sensation, a tingling on her skin that
replied, "and you will
establish a dowry for me of she compared to stepping into a cold-needle shower on a red-hot day. Soon
all the things and goods she was going to church less often, drifting away from the life she had
which belong to you, in
known. Although outwardly nothing had changed between them, inwardly
writing." Satni acquiesced,
saying, "Bring me the all semblance of resistance to him had melted away. One night, after a party,
scribe of the school." • she succumbed. She and Flynn eventually engaged in a stormy marriage
When he had done what
that lasted seven years.
she asked, Thubuit rose
and dressed herself in a
robe of fine linen, through
which Satni could see all Interpretation. The women who became involved with Errol Flynn (and
her limbs. His passion
by the end of his life they numbered in the thousands) had every reason in
increased, but she said, "If
it is true that you desire to the world to feel suspicious of him: he was real life's closest thing to a Don
have your pleasure of me, Juan. (In fact he had played the legendary seducer in a film.) He was con-
you will make your
stantly surrounded by women, who knew that no involvement with him
children subscribe to my
deed, that they may not could last. And then there were the rumors of his temper, and his love of
seek a quarrel with my danger and adventure. No woman had greater reason to resist him than
children." Satni sent for
Nora Eddington: when she met him he stood accused of rape; she was in-
his children. "If it is true
volved with another man; she was a God-fearing Catholic. Yet she fell un-
that you desire to have
your pleasure of me, you der his spell, just like all the rest. Some seducers—D. H. Lawrence for
will cause your children to instance—operate mostly on the mind, creating fascination, stirring up the
be killed, that they may
need to possess them. Flynn operated on the body. His cool, nonchalant
not seek a quarrel with my
children." Satni consented manner infected women, lowering their resistance. This happened almost
again: "Let any crime be the minute they met him, like a drug: he was at ease around women, grace-
done to them which your
ful and confident. They fell into this spirit, drifting along on a current he
heart desires." "Go into
that room," said Thubuit; created, leaving the world and its heaviness behind—it was only you and
and while the little corpses him. Then—perhaps that same day, perhaps a few weeks later—there would
were thrown out to the
come a touch of his hand, a certain look, that would make them feel a tin-
stray dogs and cats, Satni
gling, a vibration, a dangerously physical excitement. They would betray
at last lay on a bed of ivory
and ebony, that his love that moment in their eyes, a blush, a nervous laugh, and he would swoop in
might be rewarded, and for the kill. No one moved faster than Errol Flynn.
Thubuit lay down at his
side. "Then," the texts The greatest obstacle to the physical part of the seduction is the target's
modestly say, "magic and education, the degree to which he or she has been civilized and socialized.
the god Amen did much." Such education conspires to constrain the body, dull the senses, fill the
• The charms of the
mind with doubts and worries. Flynn had the ability to return a woman to
Divine Women must have
been irresistible, if even a more natural state, in which desire, pleasure, and sex had nothing negative
"the wisest men" were attached to them. He lured women into adventure not with arguments but

[PAGE 429]
Use Physical Lures • 401
with an open, unrestrained attitude that infected their minds. Understand: ready to do anything in
it all starts from you. When the time comes to make the seduction physical, their desire to abandon
themselves, even for a few
train yourself to let go of your own inhibitions, your doubts, your linger-
moments, to their trained
ing feelings of guilt and anxiety. Your confidence and ease will have more embraces.
power to intoxicate the victim than all the alcohol you could apply. Exhibit
—G. R.TABOUIS, THE PRIVATE
a lightness of spirit—nothing bothers you, nothing daunts you, you take LIFE OF TUTANKHAMEN,
nothing personally. You are inviting your targets to shed the burdens of TRANSLATED BY M. R. DOBIE
civilization, to follow your lead and drift. Do not talk of work, duty, mar-
riage, the past or future. Plenty of other people will do that. Instead, offer
the rare thrill of losing oneself in the moment, where the senses come dive CÉLIE: What is the
and the mind is left behind. moment, and how do you
define it? Because I must
say in all good honesty that
When he kissed me, it evoked a response I had never
I do not understand you. •
known or imagined before, a giddying of all my senses. It THE DUKE: A certain
was instinctive joy, against which no warning, reasoning disposition of the senses, as
unexpected as it is
monitor within me availed. It was new and irresistible and
involuntary, which a
finally overpowering. Seduction—the word implies being
woman can conceal, but
led—and so gently, so tenderly. which, should it be
perceived or sensed by
—LINDA CHRISTIAN someone who might profit
from it, puts her in the
greatest danger of being a
Keys to Seduction little more willing than she
thought she ever should or
could be.
Now more than ever, our minds are in a state of constant distraction,
—CRÉBILLON FILS, LE HASARD
barraged with endless information, pulled in every direction. Many AU COIN DU FEU, QUOTED IN
of us recognize the problem: articles are written, studies are completed, but MICHEL FEHER, ED., THE
LIBERTINE READER
they simply become more information to digest. It is almost impossible to
turn off an overactive mind; the attempt simply triggers more thoughts—
an inescapable hall of mirrors. Perhaps we turn to alcohol, to drugs, to
physical activity—anything to help us slow the mind, be more present in When, on an autumn
evening, with closed eyes, \
the moment. Our discontent presents the crafty seducer with infinite op-
I breathe the warm dark
portunity. The waters around you are teeming with people seeking some fragrance of your breast, \
kind of release from mental overstimulation. The lure of unencumbered Before me blissful shores
unfold, caressed \ By
physical pleasure will make them take your bait, but as you prowl the wa-
dazzling fires from blue
ters, understand: the only way to relax a distracted mind is to make it focus unchanging skies. \ And
on one thing. A hypnotist asks the patient to focus on a watch swinging there, upon that calm and
back and forth. Once the patient focuses, the mind relaxes, the senses drowsing isle, \ Grow
luscious fruits amid
awaken, the body becomes prone to all kinds of novel sensations and sug-
fantastic trees: \ There,
gestions. As a seducer, you are a hypnotist, and what you are making the men are lithe: the women
target focus on is you. of those seas \ Amaze one
with their gaze that knows
Throughout the seductive process you have been filling the target's
no guile. \ Your perfume
mind. Letters, mementos, shared experiences keep you constantly present, wafts me thither like a
even when you are not there. Now, as you shift to the physical part of wind: \ I see a harbor
thronged with masts and
the seduction, you must see your targets more often. Your attention must
sails \ Still weary from the
become more intense. Errol Flynn was a master at this game. When he tumult of the gales; \ And

[PAGE 430]
402 • The Art of Seduction
with the sailors' song that honied in on a victim, he dropped everything else. The woman was made
drifts to me \ Are mingled to feel that everything came second to her—his career, his friends, every-
odors of the tamarind, \
thing. Then he would take her on a little trip, preferably with water
—And all my soul is scent
and melody. around. Slowly the rest of the world would fade into the background, and
Flynn would take center stage. The more your targets think of you, the less
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
"EXOTIC PERFUME," they are distracted by thoughts of work and duty. When the mind focuses
THE FLOWERS OF EVIL, on one thing it relaxes, and when the mind relaxes, all the little paranoid
TRANSLATED BY ALAN CONDER
thoughts that we are prone to—do you really like me, am I intelligent or
beautiful enough, what does the future hold—vanish from the surface. Re-
member: it all starts with you. Be undistracted, present in the moment, and
the target will follow suit. The intense gaze of the hypnotist creates a simi-
lar reaction in the patient.
Once the target's overactive mind starts to slow down, their senses will
come to life, and your physical lures will have double their power. Now a
heated glance will give them flush. You will have a tendency to employ
physical lures that work primarily on the eyes, the sense we most rely on in
our culture. Physical appearances are critical, but you are after a general agi-
tation of the senses. La Belle Otero made sure men noticed her breasts, her
figure, her perfume, her walk; no part was allowed to predominate. The
senses are interconnected—an appeal to smell will trigger touch, an appeal
to touch will trigger vision: casual or "accidental" contact—better a brush-
ing of the skin than something more forceful right now—will create a
jolt and activate the eyes. Subtly modulate the voice, make it slower and
deeper. Living senses will crowd out rational thought.
In the eighteenth-century libertine novel The Wayward Head and Heart,
by Crébillon fils, Madame de Lursay is trying to seduce a younger man,
Meilcour. Her weapons are several. One night at a party she is hosting, she
wears a revealing gown; her hair is slightly tousled; she throws him heated
glances; her voice trembles a bit. When they are alone, she innocently gets
him to sit close to her, and talks more slowly; at one point she starts to cry.
Meilcour has many reasons to resist her; he has fallen in love with a girl his
own age, and he has heard rumors about Madame de Lursay that should
make him distrust her. But the clothes, the looks, the perfume, the voice,
the closeness of her body, the tears—it all begins to overwhelm him. "An
indescribable agitation stirred my senses." Meilcour succumbs.
The French libertines of the eighteenth century called this "the mo-
ment." The seducer leads the victim to a point where he or she reveals in-
voluntary signs of physical excitation that can be read in various symptoms.
Once those signs are detected, the seducer must work quickly, applying
pressure on the target to get lost in the moment—the past, the future, all
moral scruples vanishing in air. Once your victims lose themselves in the
moment, it is all over—their mind, their conscience, no longer holds them
back. The body gives in to pleasure. Madame de Lursay lures Meilcour into
the moment by creating a generalized disorder of the senses, rendering him
incapable of thinking straight.
In leading your victims into the moment, remember a few things. First,

[PAGE 431]
Use Physical Lures • 403
a disordered look (Madame de Lursay's tousled hair, her ruffled dress) has
more effect on the senses than a neat appearance. It suggests the bedroom.
Second, be alert to the signs of physical excitation. Blushing, trembling of
the voice, tears, unusually forceful laughter, relaxing movements of the
body (any kind of involuntary mirroring, their gestures imitating yours), a
revealing slip of the tongue—these are signs that the victim is slipping into
the moment and pressure is to be applied.
In 1934, a Chinese football player named Li met a young actress named
Lan Ping in Shanghai. He began to see her often at his matches, cheering
him on. They would meet at public affairs, and he would notice her glanc-
ing at him with her "strange, yearning eyes," then looking away. One eve-
ning he found her seated next to him at a reception. Her leg brushed up
against his. They chatted, and she asked him to see a movie with her at a
nearby cinema. Once they were there, her head found its way onto his
shoulder; she whispered into his ear, something about the film. Later they
strolled the streets, and she put her arm around his waist. She brought him
to a restaurant where they drank some wine. Li took her to his hotel room,
and there he found himself overwhelmed by caresses and sweet words. She
gave him no room to retreat, no time to cool down. Three years later Lan
Ping—soon to be renamed Jiang Qing—played a similar game on Mao Ze-
dong. She was to become Mao's wife—the infamous Madame Mao, leader
of the Gang of Four.
Seduction, like warfare, is often a game of distance and closeness. At
first you track your enemy from a distance. Your main weapons are your
eyes, and a mysterious manner. Byron had his famous underlook, Madame
Mao her yearning eyes. The key is to make the look short and to the point,
then look away, like a rapier glancing the flesh. Make your eyes reveal de-
sire, and keep the rest of the face still. (A smile will spoil the effect.) Once
the victim is heated up, you quickly bridge the distance, turning to hand-
to-hand combat in which you give the enemy no room to withdraw, no
time to think or to consider the position in which you have placed him or
her. To take the element of fear out of this, use flattery, make the target feel
more masculine or feminine, praise their charms. It is their fault that you
have become so physical and aggressive. There is no greater physical lure
than to make the target feel alluring. Remember: the girdle of Aphrodite,
which gave her untold seductive powers, included that of sweet flattery.
Shared physical activity is always an excellent lure. The Russian mystic
Rasputin would begin his seductions with a spiritual lure—the promise of
a shared religious experience. But then his eyes would bore into his target
at a party, and inevitably he would lead her in a dance, which would be-
come more and more suggestive as he moved closer to her. Hundreds of
women succumbed to this technique. For Flynn it was swimming or sail-
ing. In such physical activity, the mind turns off and the body operates ac-
cording to its own laws. The target's body will follow your lead, will mirror
your moves, as far as you want it to go.
In the moment, all moral considerations fade away, and the body re-

[PAGE 432]
404 • The Art of Seduction
turns to a state of innocence. You can partly create that feeling through a
devil-may-care attitude. You do not worry about the world, or what peo-
ple think of you; you do not judge your target in any way. Part of Flynn's
appeal was his total acceptance of a woman. He was not interested in a par-
ticular body type, a woman's race, her level of education, her political be-
liefs. He was in love with her feminine presence. He was luring her into an
adventure, free of society's strictures and moral judgments. With him she
could act out a fantasy—which, for many, was the chance to be aggressive
or transgressive, to experience danger. So empty yourself of your tendency
to moralize and judge. You have lured your targets into a momentary world
of pleasure—soft and accommodating, all rules and taboos thrown out the
window.
Symbol: The Raft. Floating out to sea, drifting with the current. Soon the shore-
line disappears from sight, and the two of you are alone. The water invites you to
forget all cares and worries, to submerge yourself. Without anchor or direction, cut
off from the past, you give in to the drifting sensation and slowly lose all restraint.
Reversal
Some people panic when they sense they are falling into the moment.
Often, using spiritual lures will help disguise the increasingly physical
nature of the seduction. That is how the lesbian seductress Natalie Barney
operated. In her heyday, at the turn of the twentieth century, lesbian sex
was immensely transgressive, and women new to it often felt a sense of
shame or dirtiness. Barney led them into the physical, but so enveloped it
in poetry and mysticism that they relaxed and felt purified by the experi-
ence. Today, few people feel repulsed by their sexual nature, but many are
uncomfortable with their bodies. A purely physical approach will frighten
and disturb them. Instead, make it seem a spiritual, mystical union, and
they will take less notice of your physical manipulations.

[PAGE 433]
Master the Art of the Bold Move
A moment has
arrived: your victim clearly desires you,
but is not ready to admit it openly, let alone act on it.
This is the time to throw aside chivalry, kindness, and coquetry
and to overwhelm with a bold move. Don't give the victim time to consider
the consequences; create conflict, stir up tension, so that the bold move comes as
a great release. Showing hesitation or awkwardness means you are thinking of
yourself, as opposed to being overwhelmed by the victim's charms. Never hold
back or meet the target halfway, under the belief that you are being
correct and considerate; you must be seductive now, not
political. One person must go on the of-
fensive, and it is you.

[PAGE 434]


[PAGE 435]
The Perfect Climax
Through a campaign of deception—the misleading appearance of a
transformation into goodness—the rake Valmont laid siege to the vir-
tuous young Présidente de Tourvel until the day came when, disturbed by
his confession of love for her, she insisted he leave the château where both
of them were staying as guests. He complied. From Paris, however, he
flooded her with letters, describing his love for her in the most intense
terms; she begged him to stop, and once again he complied. Then, several It afforded, moreover,
another advantage: that of
weeks later, he paid a surprise visit to the château. In his company Tourvel
observing at my leisure her
was flushed and jumpy, and kept her eyes averted—all signs of his effect oncharming face, more
her. Again she asked him to leave. What have you to fear? he replied, I have beautiful than ever, as it
proffered the powerful
always done what you have asked, I have never forced myself on you. He
enticement of tears. My
kept his distance and she slowly relaxed. She no longer left the room when blood was on fire, and I
he entered, and she could look at him directly. When he offered to accom- was so little in control of
myself that I was tempted
pany her on a walk, she did not refuse. They were friends, she said. She
to make the most of the
even put her arm in his as they strolled, a friendly gesture.
occasion. • How weak we
One rainy day they could not take their usual walk. He met her in the must be, how strong the
dominion of circumstance,
hallway as she was entering her room; for the first time, she invited him in.
if even I, without a
She seemed relaxed, and Valmont sat near her on a sofa. He talked of his
thought for my plans, could
love for her. She gave the faintest protest. He took her hand; she left it risk losing all the charm of
there and leaned against his arm. Her voice trembled. She looked at him, a prolonged struggle, all the
fascination of a laboriously
and he felt his heart flutter—it was a tender, loving look. She started to
administered defeat, by
speak—"Well! yes, I . . ."—then suddenly collapsed into his arms, crying. It concluding a premature
was a moment of weakness, yet Valmont held himself back. Her crying be- victory; if distracted by the
most puerile of desires, I
came convulsive; she begged him to help her, to leave the room before
could be willing that the
something terrible happened. He did so. The following morning he awoke conqueror of Madame de
to some surprising news: in the middle of the night, claiming she was feel- Tourvel should take
nothing for the fruit of his
ing ill, Tourvel had suddenly left the château and returned home.
labors but the tasteless
Valmont did not follow her to Paris. Instead he began staying up late, distinction of having added
and using no powder to hide the peaked looks that soon ensued. He went one more name to the roll.
Ah, let her surrender, but
to the chapel every day, and dragged himself despondently around the
let her fight! Let her be too
château. He knew that his hostess would be writing to the Présidente, who
weak to prevail but strong
would hear of his sad state. Next he wrote to a church father in Paris, and enough to resist; let her
asked him to pass along a message to Tourvel: he was ready to change hissavor the knowledge of her
weakness at her leisure, but
life for good. He wanted one last meeting, to say goodbye and to return the
let her be unwilling to
letters she had written him over the last few months. The father arranged a admit defeat. Leave the
407

[PAGE 436]
408 • The Art of Seduction
humble poacher to kill the meeting, and so, one late afternoon in Paris, Valmont found himself once
stag where he has surprised again alone with Tourvel, in a room in her house.
it in its hiding place;
The Présidente was clearly on edge; she could not look him in the eye.
the true hunter will
bring it to bay. They exchanged pleasantries, but then Valmont turned harsh: she had
treated him cruelly, had apparently been determined to make him unhappy.
—VICOMTE DE VALMONT,
IN CHODERLOS DE LACLOS, Well, this was the end, they were separating for good, since that was how
DANGEROUS LIAISONS, she wanted it. Tourvel argued back: she was a married woman, she had no
TRANSLATED BY P.W.K. STONE,
IN MICHEL FEHER, ED., choice. Valmont softened his tone and apologized: he was unused to having
THE LIBERTINE READER such strong feelings, he said, and could not control himself. Still, he would
never trouble her again. Then he laid on a table the letters he had come to
return.
Don't you know that
Tourvel came closer: the sight of her letters, and the memory of all the
however willing, however
eager we are to give turmoil they represented, affected her powerfully. She had thought his de-
ourselves, we must cision to renounce his libertine way of life was voluntary, she said—with a
nevertheless have an
touch of bitterness in her voice, as if she resented being abandoned. No, it
excuse? And is there any
more convenient than an was not voluntary, he replied, it was because she had spurned him. Then
appearance of yielding to he suddenly stepped closer and took her in his arms. She did not resist.
force? As for me, I shall "Adorable woman!" he cried. "You have no idea of the love you inspire.
admit that one thing that
You will never know how I have worshipped you, how much dearer my
most flatters me is a lively
and well-executed attack, feelings have been to me than life! . . . May [your days] be blessed with all
when everything happens of the happiness of which you have deprived me!" Then he let her go and
in quick but orderly
turned to leave.
succession; which never
puts us in the painfully Tourvel suddenly snapped. "You shall listen to me. I insist," she said,
embarrassing position of and grabbed his arm. He turned around and they embraced. This time he
having to cover up some
waited no longer, picking her up, carrying her to an ottoman, overwhelm-
blunder of which, on the
contrary, we ought to be ing her with kisses and sweet words of the happiness he now felt. Before
taking advantage; which this sudden flood of caresses, all her resistance gave way. "From this mo-
keeps up an appearance of
ment on I am yours," she said, "and you will hear neither refusals nor re-
taking by storm even that
grets from my lips." Tourvel was true to her word, and Valmont's suspicions
which we are quite
prepared to surrender; and were to prove correct: the pleasures he won from her were far greater than
adroitly flatters our two with any other woman he had seduced.
favorite passions—the
pride of defense and the
pleasure of defeat.
Interpretation. Valmont—a character in Choderlos de Laclos's eighteenth-
—MARQUISE DE MERTEUIL IN
CHODERLOS DE LACLOS, century novel Dangerous Liaisons—can sense several things about the Prési-
DANGEROUS LIAISONS, dente at first glance. She is timid and nervous. Her husband almost
TRANSLATED BY P.W.K. STONE
certainly treats her with respect—probably too much of it. Beneath her in-
IN MICHEL FEHER, ED.,
THE LIBERTINE READER terest in God, religion, and virtue is a passionate woman, vulnerable to the
lure of a romance and to the flattering attention of an ardent suitor. No
one, not even her husband, has given her this feeling, because they have all
What sensible man will been so daunted by her prudish exterior.
not intersperse his coaxing \
Valmont begins his seduction, then, by being indirect. He knows
With kisses? Even if she
doesn't kiss back, \ Still Tourvel is secretly fascinated with his bad reputation. By acting as if he is
force on regardless! She contemplating a change in his life, he can make her want to reform him—a
may struggle, cry
desire that is unconsciously a desire to love him. Once she has opened up
"Naughty!" \ Yet she
wants to be overcome. Just ever so slightly to his influence, he strikes at her vanity: she has never felt

[PAGE 437]
Master the Art of the Bold Move • 409
desired as a woman, and on some level cannot help but enjoy his love for take care \ Not to bruise
her. Of course she struggles and resists, but that is only a sign that her emo- her tender lips with such
hard-snatched kisses, \
tions are engaged. (Indifference is the single most effective deterrent to
Don't give her a chance to
seduction.) By taking his time, by making no bold moves even when he has protest \ You're too rough.
the opportunity for them, he instills in her a false sense of security and Those who grab their
kisses, but not what
proves himself by being patient. On what he pretends is his last visit to her,
follows, \ Deserve to lose
however, he can sense she is ready—weak, confused, more afraid of losing
all they've gained. How
the addictive feeling of being desired than of suffering the consequences of short were you \ Of the
adultery. He deliberately makes her emotional, dramatically displays her let- ultimate goal after all your
kissing? That was \
ters, creates some tension by playing a game of push-and-pull, and when
Gaucheness, not modesty,
she takes his arm, he knows it is the time to strike. Now he moves quickly, I'm afraid . . .
allowing her no time for doubts or second thoughts. But his move seems to
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
arise out of love, not lust. After so much resistance and tension, what a TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
pleasure to finally surrender. The climax now comes as a great release.
Never underestimate the role of vanity in love and seduction. If you
seem impatient, champing at the bit for sex, you signal that it is all about I have tested all manner of
pleasures, and known every
libido, and that it has little to do with the target's own charms. That is
variety of joy; and I have
why you must defer the climax. A lengthier courtship will feed the target's
found that neither intimacy
vanity, and will make the effect of your bold move all the more powerful with princes, nor wealth
and enduring. Wait too long, though—showing desire, but then proving acquired, nor finding after
lacking, nor returning after
too timid to make your move—and you will stir up a different kind of inse-
long absence, nor security
curity: "You found me desirable, but you are not acting on your desires; after fear and repose in a
maybe you're not so interested." Doubts like these affront your target's safe refuge—none of these
things so powerfully affects
vanity (if you're not interested, maybe I'm not so interesting), and are fatal
the soul as union with the
in the latter stages of seduction; awkwardness and misunderstandings will beloved, especially if it
spring up everywhere. Once you read in your targets' gestures that they are come after long denial and
continual banishment. For
ready and open—a look in the eye, mirroring behavior, a strange nervous-
then the flame of passion
ness in your presence—you must go on the offensive, make them feel that waxes exceeding hot, and
their charms have unhinged you and pushed you into the bold move. They the furnace of yearning
will then have the ultimate pleasure: physical surrender and a psychological blazes up, and the fire of
eager hope rages ever more
boost to their vanity.
fiercely.
—IBN HAZM, THE RING OF
The more timidity a lover shows with us the more it con-
THE DOVE: A TREATISE ON THE
cerns our pride to goad him on; the more respect he has for ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB
our resistance, the more respect we demand of him. We LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A. J.
ARBERRY
would willingly say to you men: "Ah, in pity's name do
not suppose us to be so very virtuous; you are forcing us to
have too much of it."
I knew once two great
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS lords, brothers, both of
them highly bred and
highly accomplished
Keys to Seduction gentlemen which did love
two ladies, but the one of
these was of much higher
Think of seduction as a world you enter, a world that is separate and quality and more account
than the other in all
distinct from the real world. The rules are different here; what works
respects. Now being entered
in daily life can have the opposite effect in seduction. The real world fea- both into the chamber of

[PAGE 438]
410 • The Art of Seduction
this great lady, who for the tures a democratizing, leveling impulse, in which everything has to seem at
time being was keeping her least something like equal. An overt imbalance of power, an overt desire for
bed, each did withdraw
power, will stir envy and resentment; we learn to be kind and polite, at least
apart for to entertain his
mistress. The one did on the surface. Even those who have power generally try to act humble and
converse with the high-born modest—they do not want to offend. In seduction, on the other hand, you
dame with every possible
can throw all of that out, revel in your dark side, inflict a little pain—in
respect and humble saluta-
some ways be more yourself. Your naturalness in this respect will prove se-
tion and kissing of hands,
with words of honor and ductive in itself. The problem is that after years of living in the real world,
stately compliment, without we lose the ability to be ourselves. We become timid, humble, overpolite.
making ever an attempt to
Your task is to regain some of your childhood qualities, to root out all this
come near and try to force
the place. The other brother, false humility. And the most important quality to recapture is boldness.
without any ceremony of No one is born timid; timidity is a protection we develop. If we never
words or fine phrases, did
stick our necks out, if we never try, we will never have to suffer the conse-
take his fair one to a
recessed window, and quences of failure or success. If we are kind and unobtrusive, no one will
incontinently making free be offended—in fact we will seem saintly and likable. In truth, timid peo-
with her (for he was very
ple are often self-absorbed, obsessed with the way people see them, and not
strong), he did soon show
at all saintly. And humility may have its social uses, but it is deadly in seduc-
her 'twas not his way to
love à l'espagnole, with tion. You need to be able to play the humble saint at times; it is a mask you
eyes and tricks of face and wear. But in seduction, take it off. Boldness is bracing, erotic, and ab-
words, but in the genuine
solutely necessary to bring the seduction to its conclusion. Done right, it
fashion and proper mode
every true lover should tells your targets that they have made you lose your normal restraint, and
desire. Presently having gives them license to do so as well. People are yearning to have a chance to
finished his task, he doth
play out the repressed sides of their personality. At the final stage of a se-
quit the chamber; but as he
goes, saith to his brother, duction, boldness eliminates any awkwardness or doubts. In a dance, two
loud enough for his lady to people cannot lead. One takes over, sweeping the other along. Seduction is
hear the words: "Do you
not egalitarian; it is not a harmonic convergence. Holding back at the end
as I have done, brother
mine; else you do naught at out of fear of offending, or thinking it correct to share the power, is a
all. Be you as brave and recipe for disaster. This is an arena not for politics but for pleasure. It can be
hardy as you will else- by the man or woman, but a bold move is required. If you are so con-
where, yet if you show not
cerned about the other person, console yourself with the thought that
your hardihood here and
now, you are disgraced; for the pleasure of the one who surrenders is often greater than that of the
here is no place of cere- aggressor.
mony and respect, but one
As a young man, the actor Errol Flynn was uncontrollably bold. This
where you do see your lady
before you, which doth but often got him into trouble; he became too aggressive around desirable
wait your attack." So with women. Then, while traveling through the Far East, he became interested
this he did leave his brother,
in the Asian practice of tantric sex, in which the male must train himself
which yet for that while did
refrain him and put it off to not to ejaculate, preserving his potency and heightening both partners'
another time. But for this pleasure in the process. Flynn later applied this principle to his seductions as
the lady did by no means
well, teaching himself to restrain his natural boldness and delay the end of
esteem him more highly,
the seduction as long as possible. So, while boldness can work wonders, un-
whether it was she did put
it down to an overchilliness controllable boldness is not seductive but frightening; you need to be able
in love, or a lack of courage, to turn it on and off at will, know when to use it. As in Tantrism, you can
or a defect of bodily vigor.
create more pleasure by delaying the inevitable.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME, In the 1720s, the Duc de Richelieu developed an infatuation with a
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
certain duchess. The woman was exceptionally beautiful, and was desired
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON by one and all, but she was far too virtuous to take a lover, although she

[PAGE 439]
Master the Art of the Bold Move • 411
could be quite coquettish. Richelieu bided his time. He befriended her, A man should proceed to
charming her with the wit that had made him the favorite of the ladies. enjoy any woman when
she gives him an
One night a group of such women, including the duchess, decided to play
opportunity and makes her
a practical joke on him, in which he was to be forced naked out of his own love manifest to him
room at the palace of Versailles. The joke worked to perfection, the ladies by the following signs: she
all got to see him in his native glory, and had a good chuckle watching him calls out to a man without
first being addressed by
run away. There were many places Richelieu could have hidden; the place
him; she shows herself to
he chose was the duchess's bedroom. Minutes later he watched her enter him in secret places; she
and undress, and once the candles were extinguished, he crept into bed speaks to him tremblingly
and inarticulately; her face
with her. She protested, tried to scream. He covered her mouth with kisses,
blooms with delight and
and she eventually and happily relented. Richelieu had decided to make his her fingers or toes perspire;
bold move then for several reasons. First, the duchess had come to like him, and sometimes she remains
with both hands placed on
and even to harbor a secret desire for him. She would never act upon it or
his body as if she had been
admit it, but he was certain it existed. Second, she had seen him naked, and surprised by something, or
could not help but be impressed. Third, she would feel a touch of pity for as if overcome with fatigue.
• After a woman has
his predicament, and for the joke played on him. Richelieu, a consummate
manifested her love to him
seducer, would find no more perfect moment.
by outward signs, and by
The bold move should come as a pleasant surprise, but not too much of the motions of her body,
the man should make every
a surprise. Learn to read the signs that the target is falling for you. His or
possible attempt to conquer
her manner toward you will have changed—it will be more pliant, with
her. There should be no
more words and gestures mirroring yours—yet there will still be a touch of indecision or hesitancy: if
nervousness and uncertainty. Inwardly they have given in to you, but they an opening is found the
man should make the most •
do not expect a bold move. This is the time to strike. If you wait too long,
of it. The woman, indeed,
to the point where they consciously desire and expect you to make a move, becomes disgusted with the
it loses the piquancy of coming as a surprise. You want a degree of tension man if he is timid about
his chances and throws
and ambivalence, so that the move represents a great release. Their surren-
them away. Boldness is the
der will relieve tension like a long-awaited summer storm. Don't plan your rule, for everything is to be
bold move in advance; it cannot seem calculated. Wait for the opportune gained, and nothing lost.
moment, as Richelieu did. Be attentive to favorable circumstances. This
—THE HINDU ART OF LOVE,
will give you room to improvise and go with the moment, which will COLLECTED AND EDITED BY
EDWARD WINDSOR
heighten the impression you want to create of being suddenly over-
whelmed by desire. If you ever sense that the victim is expecting the bold
move, take a step back, lull them into a false sense of security, then strike.
Sometime in the fifteenth century, the writer Bandello relates, a young
Venetian widow had a sudden lust for a handsome nobleman. She had her
father invite him to their palace to discuss business, but during the meeting
the father had to leave, and she offered to give the young man a tour of the
place. His curiosity was piqued by her bedroom, which she described as the
most splendid room in the palace, but which she also passed by without let-
ting him enter. He begged to be shown the room, and she granted his wish.
He was spellbound: the velvets, the rare objets, the suggestive paintings, the
delicate white candles. A beguiling scent filled the room. The widow put
out all of the candles but one, then led the man to the bed, which had been
heated with a warming pan. He quickly succumbed to her caresses. Follow
the widow's example: your bold move should have a theatrical quality to it.
That will make it memorable, and make your aggressiveness seem pleasant,

[PAGE 440]
412 • The Art of'Seduction
part of the drama. The theatricality can come from the setting—an exotic
or sensual location. It can also come from your actions. The widow piqued
her victim's curiosity by creating the suspense about her bedroom. An ele-
ment of fear—someone might find you, say—will heighten the tension.
Remember: you are creating a moment that must stand out from the same-
ness of daily life.
Keeping your targets emotional will both weaken them and heighten
the drama of the moment. And the best way to keep them at an emotional
pitch is by infecting them with emotions of your own. When Valmont
wanted the Presidents to become calm, angry, or tender, he showed that
emotion first, and she mirrored it. People are very susceptible to the moods
of those around them; this is particularly acute at the latter stages of a se-
duction, when resistance is low and the target has fallen under your spell.
At the point of the bold move, learn to infect your target with whatever
emotional mood you require, as opposed to suggesting the mood with
words. You want access to the target's unconscious, which is best obtained
by infecting them with emotions, bypassing their conscious ability to resist.
It may seem expected for the male to make the bold move, but history
is full of successfully bold females. There are two main forms of feminine
boldness. In the first, more traditional form, the coquettish woman stirs
male desire, is completely in control, then at the last minute, after bringing
her victim to a boil, steps back and lets him make the bold move. She sets it
up, then signals with her eyes, her gestures, that she is ready for him. Cour-
tesans have used this method throughout history; it is how Cleopatra
worked on Antony, how Josephine seduced Napoleon, how La Belle Otero
amassed a fortune during the Belle Epoque. It lets the man maintain his
masculine illusions, although the woman is really the aggressor.
The second form of feminine boldness does not bother with such illu-
sions: the woman simply takes charge, initiates the first kiss, pounces on
her victim. This is how Marguerite de Valois, Lou Andreas-Salomé, and
Madame Mao operated, and many men find it not emasculating at all but
very exciting. It all depends on the insecurities and proclivities of the vic-
tim. This kind of feminine boldness has its allure because it is more rare
than the first kind, but then all boldness is somewhat rare. A bold move will
always stand out compared to the usual treatment afforded by the tepid hus-
band, the timid lover, the hesitant suitor. That is how you want it. If every-
one were bold, boldness would quickly lose its allure.

[PAGE 441]
Master the Art of the Bold Move • 413
Symbol: The Summer Storm. The hot days follow one another,
with no end in sight. The earth is parched and dry. Then there
comes a stillness in the air, thick and oppressive—the calm
before the storm. Suddenly gusts of wind arrive, and
flashes of lightning, exciting and frightening. Allow-
ing no time to react or run for shelter, the rain
comes, and brings with it a sense of
release. At last.
Reversal
If two people come together by mutual consent, that is not a seduction.
There is no reversal.

[PAGE 442]


[PAGE 443]
Beware the Aftereffects
Danger follows
in the aftermath of a successful se-
duction. After emotions have reached a pitch,
they often swing in the opposite direction—toward
lassitude, distrust, disappointment. Beware of the long,
drawn-out goodbye; insecure, the victim will cling and claw,
and both sides will suffer. If you are to part, make the sacrifice
swift and sudden. If necessary, deliberately break the spell you
have created. If you are to stay in a relationship, beware a flag-
ging of energy, a creeping familiarity that will spoil the
fantasy. If the game is to go on, a second seduction is
required. Never let the other person take you for
granted—use absence, create pain and con-
flict, to keep the seduced on ten-
terhooks.

[PAGE 444]


[PAGE 445]
Disenchantment
Seduction is a kind of spell, an enchantment. When you seduce, you are
not quite your normal self; your presence is heightened, you are playing
more than one role, you are strategically concealing your tics and insecuri-
ties. You have deliberately created mystery and suspense to make the victim
experience a real-life drama. Under your spell, the seduced gets to feel
In a word, woe to the
transported away from the world of work and responsibility. woman of too monotonous
You will keep this going for as long as you want or can, heightening the a temperament; her
monotony satiates and
tension, stirring the emotions, until the time finally comes to complete the
disgusts. She is always the
seduction. After that, disenchantment almost inevitably sets in. The release of same statue, with her a
tension is followed by a letdown—of excitement, of energy—that can even man is always right. She is
so good, so gentle, that she
materialize as a kind of disgust directed at you by your victim, even though
takes away from people the
what is happening is really a natural emotional course. It is as if a drug were privilege of quarreling with
wearing off, allowing the target to see you as you are—and being disap- her, and this is often such a
great pleasure! Put in her
pointed by the flaws that are inevitably there. On your side, you too have
place a vivacious woman,
probably tended to idealize your targets somewhat, and once your desire is capricious, decided, to a
satisfied, you may see them as weak. (After all, they have given in to you.) certain limit, however, and
You too may feel disappointed. Even in the best of circumstances, you are things assume a different
aspect. The lover will find
dealing now with the reality rather than the fantasy, and the flames will
in the same person the
slowly die down—unless you start up a second seduction. pleasure of variety. Temper
You may think that if the victim is to be sacrificed, none of this mat- is the salt, the quality
which prevents it front
ters. But sometimes your effort to break off the relationship will inadver-
becoming stale.
tently revive the spell for the other person, causing him or her to cling to Restlessness, jealousy,
you tenaciously. No, in either direction—sacrifice, or the integration of the quarrels, making friends
again, spitefulness, all are
two of you into a couple—you must take disenchantment into account.
the food of love. Enchant-
There is an art to the post-seduction as well. ing variety? . . . Too
Master the following tactics to avoid undesired aftereffects. constant a peace is produc-
tive of a deadly ennui.
Uniformity kills love, for
as soon as the spirit of
Fight against inertia. The sense that you are trying less hard is often method mingles in an affair
of the heart, the passion
enough to disenchant your victims. Reflecting back on what you did dur-
disappears, languor super-
ing the seduction, they will see you as manipulative: you wanted something
venes, weariness begins to
then, and so you worked at it, but now you are taking them for granted. wear, and disgust ends the
After the first seduction is over, then, show that it isn't really over—that chapter.
you want to keep proving yourself, focusing your attention on them, luring —NINON DE L'ENCLOS,
them. That is often enough to keep them enchanted. Fight the tendency to LIFE, LETTERS AND EPICUREAN
PHILOSOPHY OF NINON DE
let things settle into comfort and routine. Stir the pot, even if that means a
L'ENCLOS
417

[PAGE 446]
418 • The Art of Seduction
Age cannot wither her, nor return to inflicting pain and pulling back. Never rely on your physical
custom stale \ Her infinite charms; even beauty loses its appeal with repeated exposure. Only strategy
variety: other women cloy \
and effort will fight off inertia.
The appetites they feed;
but she makes hungry \
Where most she satisfies.
Maintain mystery. Familiarity is the death of seduction. If the target
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA knows everything about you, the relationship gains a level of comfort but
loses the elements of fantasy and anxiety. Without anxiety and a touch of
fear, the erotic tension is dissolved. Remember: reality is not seductive.
Keep some dark corners in your character, flout expectations, use absences
Cry hurrah, and hurrah
again, for a splendid to fragment the clinging, possessive pull that allows familiarity to creep in.
triumph— \ The quarry I Maintain some mystery or be taken for granted. You will have only yourself
sought has fallen into my
to blame for what follows.
toils. . . . \ Why hurry,
young man? Your ship's
still in mid-passage, \ And
the harbor I seek is far
Maintain lightness. Seduction is a game, not a matter of life and death.
away \ Through my verses,
it's true, you may have There will be a tendency in the "post" phase to take things more seriously
acquired a mistress, \ But and personally, and to whine about behavior that does not please you. Fight
that's not enough. If my
this as much as possible, for it will create exactly the effect you do not want.
art \ Caught her, my art
must keep her. To guard a You cannot control the other person by nagging and complaining; it will
conquest's \As tricky as make them defensive, exacerbating the problem. You will have more con-
making it. There was luck trol if you maintain the proper spirit. Your playfulness, the little ruses you
in the chase, \ But this task
employ to please and delight them, your indulgence of their faults, will
will call for skill. If ever I
needed support from \ make your victims compliant and easy to handle. Never try to change your
Venus and Son, and victims; instead, induce them to follow your lead.
Erato—the Muse \ Erotic
by name—it's now, for my
too-ambitious project \ To
relate some techniques that Avoid the slow burnout. Often, one person becomes disenchanted but
might restrain \ That fickle
lacks the courage to make the break. Instead, he or she withdraws inside. As
young globetrotter,
Love. . . . \ To be loved an absence, this psychological step back may inadvertently reignite the
you must show yourself other person's desire, and a frustrating cycle begins of pursuit and retreat.
lovable— \ Something Everything unravels, slowly. Once you feel disenchanted and know it is
good looks alone \ Can
over, end it quickly, without apology. That would only insult the other per-
never achieve. You may be
handsome as Homer's son. A quick separation is often easier to get over—it is as if you had a
Nireus, \ Or young Hylas, problem being faithful, as opposed to your feeling that the seduced was no
snatched by those bad \
longer being desirable. Once you are truly disenchanted, there is no going
Naiads; but all the same,
to avoid a surprise back, so don't hang on out of false pity. It is more compassionate to make a
desertion \And keep your clean break. If that seems inappropriate or too ugly, then deliberately disen-
girl, it's best you have gifts
chant the victim with anti-seductive behavior.
of mind \ In addition to
physical charms. Beauty's
fragile, the passing \ Years
diminish its substance, eat Examples of Sacrifice and Integration
it away. \ Violets and
bell-mouthed lilies do not
bloom for ever, \ Hard 1. In the 1770s, the handsome Chevalier de Belleroche began an affair
thorns are all that's left of with an older woman, the Marquise de Merteuil. He saw a lot of her, but
the blown rose. \ So with
soon she began to pick quarrels with him. Entranced by her unpredictable
you, my handsome youth:

[PAGE 447]
Beware the Aftereffects • 419
moods, he worked hard to please her, showering her with attention and soon wrinkles will furrow \
tenderness. Eventually the quarreling stopped, and as the days went by, de Your body; soon, too soon,
your hair turn gray. \ Then
Belleroche felt confident that Merteuil loved him—until one day, when he
build an enduring mind,
came to visit, and found that she was not at home. Her footman greeted add that to your beauty: \
him at the door, and said he would take the chevalier to a secret house of It alone will last till the
flames \ Consume you.
Merteuil's outside Paris. There the marquise was waiting for him, in a re-
Keep your wits sharp,
newed mood of coquettishness: she acted as if this were their first tryst.
explore the liberal \Arts,
The chevalier had never seen her so ardent. He left at daybreak more in win mastery over Greek \
love than ever, but a few days later they quarreled again. The marquise As well as Latin. Ulysses
was eloquent, not
seemed cold after that, and he saw her flirt with another man at a party.
handsome— \ Yet he filled
He felt horribly jealous, but as before, his solution was to become more sea-goddesses' hearts \
attentive and loving. This, he thought, was the way to appease a difficult With aching passion. . . .
\ Nothing works on a
woman.
mood like tactful tolerance:
Now Merteuil had to spend a few weeks at her country home to han- harshness \ Provokes
dle some business there. She invited de Belleroche to join her for an ex- hatred, makes nasty rows. \
We detest the hawk and
tended stay, and he happily agreed, remembering the new life an earlier stay
the wolf, those natural
there had brought to their affair. Once again she surprised him: her affec- hunters, \ Always preying
tion and desire to please him were rejuvenated. This time, though, he did on timid flocks; \ But the
gentle swallow goes safe
not have to leave the next morning. Days went by, and she refused to enter-
from man's snares, we
tain any guests. The world would not intrude on them. And this time there
fashion \ Little turreted
was no coldness or quarreling, only good cheer and love. Yet now de Belle- houses for doves. \ Keep
roche began to grow a little tired of the marquise. He thought of Paris and clear of all quarrels, sharp-
tongued recriminations— \
the balls he was missing; a week later he cut short his stay on some business
Love's sensitive, needs to
pretext and hurried back to the city. Somehow the marquise did not seem be fed \ With gentle words.
so charming anymore. Leave nagging to wives
and husbands, \ Let them,
if they want, think it a
natural law, \ A permanent
Interpretation. The Marquise de Merteuil, a character in Choderlos de La- state of feud. Wives thrive
on wrangling, \ That's their
clos's novel Dangerous Liaisons, is a practiced seductress who never lets her
dowry. A mistress should
affairs drag on too long. De Belleroche is young and handsome but that is
always hear \ What she
all. As her interest in him wanes, she decides to bring him to the secret wants to be told. . . . \
house to try to inject some novelty into the affair. This works for a while, Use tender blandishments,
language that caresses \
but it isn't enough. The chevalier must be gotten rid of. She tries coldness,
The ear, make her glad
anger (hoping to start a fight), even a show of interest in another man. All you came.
this only intensifies his attachment. She can't just leave him—he might be-
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
come vengeful, or try even harder to win her back. The solution: she delib- TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
erately breaks the spell by overwhelming him with attention. Abandoning
the pattern of alternating warmth with coldness, she acts hopelessly in love.
Alone with her day after day, with no space to fantasize, he no longer sees
In Paris the band played a
her as enchanting and breaks off the affair. This was her goal all along. concert at the Palais
If a break with the victim is too messy or difficult (or you lack the Chaleux. They played the
first half, and then there
nerve), then do the next best thing: deliberately break the spell that ties him
was an hour interval—
or her to you. Aloofness or anger will only stir the other person s insecurity, intermission, we call it—
producing a clinging horror. Instead, try suffocating them with love and at- during which there was a
fabulous buffet on a great
tention: be clinging and possessive yourself, moon over the lover's every ac-
long table laden with
tion and character trait, create the sense that this monotonous affection will delicious foods and cognac,

[PAGE 448]
420 • The Art of Seduction
champagne, wine and that go on forever. No more mystery, no more coquetry, no more retreats—-just
rarity in Paris . . . Scotch. endless love. Few can endure such a threat. A few weeks of it and they will
The people, aristocrats and
be gone.
servants, some on their
hands and knees, were
busily searching for
something on the floor. A 2. King Charles II of England was a devoted libertine. He kept a stable of
duchess, who was one of
lovers: there was always a favorite mistress from the aristocracy, and count-
the hostesses, had lost one
of her larger diamonds. . . . less other less important women. He craved variety. One evening in 1668,
The duchess finally got the king spent an evening at the theater, where he conceived a sudden de-
bored seeing people looking
sire for a young actress called Nell Gwyn. She was pretty and innocent
all over the floor for the
looking (only eighteen at the time), with a girlish glow in her cheeks, but
ring. She looked around
haughtily, then took Duke the lines she recited onstage were so impudent and saucy. Deeply excited,
by the arm, saying, "It the king decided he had to have her. After the performance he took her
doesn't mean anything. I
out for a night of drinking and merriment, then led her to his royal bed.
can always get diamonds,
but how often can I get a Nell was the daughter of a fishmonger, and had begun by selling or-
man like Duke anges in the theater. She rose to the status of actress by sleeping with writ-
Ellington?" • She
ers and other theater men. She had no shame about this. (When a footman
disappeared with Duke.
The band started the of hers got into a fight with someone who said he worked for a whore, she
second half by themselves, broke it up by saying, "I am a whore. Find something better to fight
and eventually Duke
about.") Nell's humor and sass amused the king greatly, but she was low-
smilingly reappeared to
finish the concert. born, and an actress, and he could hardly make her a favorite. After several
nights with "pretty, witty Nell," he returned to his principal mistress,
—DON GEORGE, SWEET MAN:
THE REAL DUKE ELLINGTON Louise Keroualle, a well-born Frenchwoman.
Keroualle was a clever seductress. She played hard to get, and made it
clear she would not give the king her virginity until he had promised her a
title. It was the kind of chase Charles enjoyed, and he made her the
I do know, however, that
men become bigger-hearted Duchess of Portsmouth. But soon her greed and difficultness began to wear
and better lovers once they on his nerves. To divert himself, he turned back to Nell. Whenever he vis-
get the suspicion that their
ited her, he was royally entertained with food, drink, and her great good
mistresses care less about
them. When a man humor. The king was bored or melancholy? She took him drinking or
believes himself to be the gambling, or out to the country, where she taught him to fish. She always
one and only lover in a
had a pleasant surprise up her sleeve. What he loved most of all was her
woman's life, he'll whistle
wit, the way she mocked the pretentious Keroualle. The duchess had the
and go his way. • / ought
to know; I have followed habit of going into mourning whenever a nobleman of another country
this profession for the last died, as if he were a relation. Nell, too, would show up at the palace on
twenty years. If you want
these occasions dressed in black, and would sorrowfully say that she was
me to, I will tell you what
happened to me a few years mourning for the "Cham of Tartary" or the "Boog of Oronooko"—grand
ago. • At that time I had a relatives of her own. To her face, she called the duchess "Squintabella" and
steady lover, a certain
the "Weeping Willow," because of her simpering manners and melancholic
Demophantos, a usurer
living near Poikile. He had airs. Soon the king was spending more time with Nell than with the
never given me more than duchess. By the time Keroualle fell out of favor, Nell had in essence be-
five drachmas and he
come the king's favorite, which she remained until his death, in 1685.
pretended to be my man.
But his love was only
superficial, Chrysis. He
never sighed, he never shed
Interpretation. Nell Gwyn was ambitious. She wanted power and fame,
tears for me and he never
but in the seventeenth century the only way a woman could get those
spent the night waiting at

[PAGE 449]
Beware the Aftereffects • 421
things was through a man—and who better than the king? But to get in- my door. One day he came
volved with Charles was a dangerous game. A man like him, easily bored to see me, knocked at my
door, but I did not open it.
and in need of variety, would use her for a fling, then find someone else.
You see, I had the painter,
Nell's strategy for the problem was simple: she let the king have his
Callides, in my room;
other girls, and never complained. Every time he saw her, though, she Callides had given me ten
made sure he was entertained and diverted. She filled his senses with plea- drachmas. Demophantos
swore and beat his fists on
sure, acting as if his position had nothing to do with her love for him. Vari-
the door and left cursing
ety in women could wear on the nerves, tiring a busy king. They all made me. Several days passed
so many demands. If one woman could provide the same variety (and Nell, without my sending for
him; Callides was still in
as an actress, knew how to play different roles), she had a big advantage.
my house. Thereupon
Nell never asked for money, so Charles plied her with wealth. She never Demophantos, who was
asked to be the favorite—how could she? She was a commoner—but he ele- already quite excited, went
wild. He broke open my
vated her to the position.
door, wept, pulled me
Many of your targets will be like kings and queens, particularly those about, threatened to kill
who are easily bored. Once the seduction is over they will not only have me, tore my tunic, and did
everything, in fact, that a
trouble idealizing you, they may also turn to another man or woman whose
jealous man would do, and
unfamiliarity seems exciting and poetic. Needing other people to divert
finally presented me with
them, they often satisfy this need through variety. Do not play into the six thousand drachmas. In
hands of these bored royals by complaining, becoming self-pitying, or de- consideration of this sum, I
was his for a period of
manding privileges. That would only further their natural disenchantment
eight months. His wife
once the seduction is over. Instead, make them see that you are not the per- used to say that I had
son they thought you were. Make it a delightful game to play new roles, to bewitched him with some
powder. That bewitching
surprise them, to be an endless source of entertainment. It is almost impos-
powder, to be sure, was
sible to resist a person who provides pleasure with no strings attached. jealousy. That is why,
When they are with you, keep the spirit light and playful. Play up the parts Chrysis, I advise you to act
likewise with Corgi as.
of your character they find delightful, but never let them feel they know
you too well. In the end you will control the dynamic, and a haughty king —LUCIAN, DIALOGUES OF THE
COURTESANS, TRANSLATED BY
or queen will become your abject slave.
A.L.H.
3. When the great jazz composer Duke Ellington came to town, he and his
"A wife is someone on
band were always a big attraction, but especially so for the ladies of the area.
whom one gazes all one's
They came to hear his music, of course, but once there they were mesmer- life; yet it is just as well if
ized by "the Duke" himself. Onstage, Ellington was relaxed and elegant, she be not beautiful''—so
spake Jinta of the Gion.
and seemed to be having such a good time. His face was very handsome,
I'll is may be the flippant
and his bedroom eyes were infamous. (He slept very little, and his eyes had saying of a go-between, but
permanent pouches under them.) After the performance, some woman it is not to be dismissed too
lightly. . . . Besides, it is
would inevitably invite him to her table, another would sneak into his
with beautiful women as
dressing room, yet another would approach him on his way out. Duke
with beautiful views: if one
made a point of being accessible, and when he kissed a woman's hand, his is forever looking at them,
eyes and hers would meet for a moment. Sometimes she would signal an one soon tires of their
charm. This I can judge
interest in him, and his glance in return would say he was more than ready.
from my own experience.
Sometimes his eyes were the first to speak; few women could resist that One year I went to
look, even the most happily married. Matsushima, and, though
at first I was moved by the
With the night's music still ringing in her ears, the woman would show
beauty of the place and
up at Ellington's hotel room. He would be dressed in a stylish suit—he clapped my hands with

[PAGE 450]
422 • The Art of Seduction
admiration, saying to loved good clothes—and the room would be full of flowers; there would
myself, "Oh, if only I be a piano in the corner. He would play some music. His playing, and his
could bring some poet here elegant, nonchalant manner, would come across to the woman as pure the-
to show him this great
ater, a pleasant continuation of the performance she had just witnessed.
wonder!"—yet, after I had
been gazing at the scene And when it was over, and Ellington had to leave town, he would give her
from morning until night, a thoughtful gift. He would make it seem that the only thing taking him
the myriad islands began to
away from her was his touring. A few weeks later, the woman might hear a
smell unpleasantly of
seaweed, the waves that new Ellington song on the radio, with lyrics suggesting that she had in-
beat on Matsuyama Point spired it. If ever he passed through the area again, she would find a way to
became obstreperous; before
be there, and Ellington would often renew the affair, if only for a night.
I knew it I had let all the
cherry blossoms at Sometime in the 1940s, two young women from Alabama came to
Shiogama scatter; in the Chicago to attend a debutante ball. Ellington and his band were the enter-
morning I overslept and tainment. He was the women's favorite musician, and after the show, they
missed the dawn snow on
asked him for an autograph. He was so charming and engaging that one of
Mount Kinka; nor was I
much impressed by the the girls found herself asking what hotel he was staying at. He told them,
evening moon at Nagané with a big grin. The girls switched hotels, and later that day they called up
or Oshima; and in the end
Ellington and invited him to their room for a drink. He accepted. They
I picked up a few white
and black pebbles on the wore beautiful negligees that they had just bought. When Ellington ar-
cove and became engrossed rived, he acted completely naturally, as if the warm greeting they gave him
in a game of Six Musashi
were completely usual. The three of them ended up in the bedroom, when
with some children.
one of the young women had an idea: her mother adored Ellington. She
—IHARA SAIKAKU, THE LIFE OF
had to call her now and put Ellington on the phone. Not at all put out by
AN AMOROUS WOMAN,
TRANSLATED BY IVAN MORRIS the suggestion, Ellington played along. For several minutes he talked to the
mother on the telephone, lavishing her with compliments on the charming
daughter she had raised, and telling her not to worry—he was taking good
Men despise women who care of the girl. The daughter got back on the phone and said, "We're fine
love too much and because we're with Mr. Ellington and he's such a perfect gentleman." As
unwisely.
soon as she hung up, the three of them resumed the naughtiness they had
—LUCIAN, DIALOGUES started. To the two girls, it later seemed an innocent but unforgettable night
OF THE COURTESANS,
of pleasure.
TRANSLATED BY A.L.H.
Sometimes several of these far-flung mistresses would show up at the
same concert. Ellington would go up and kiss each of them four times (a
habit of his designed for just this dilemma). And each of the ladies would
I shall endeavor briefly to
outline to you how a love assume she was the one with whom the kisses really mattered.
when gained can be
deepened. They say it can
be increased in particular
by making it an infrequent Interpretation. Duke Ellington had two passions: music and women. The
and difficult business for two were interrelated. His endless affairs were a constant inspiration for his
lovers to set eyes on each
music; he also treated them as if they were theater, a work of art in them-
other, for the greater the
difficulty of offering and selves. When it came time to separate, he always managed it with a theatri-
receiving shared cal touch. A clever remark and a gift would make it seem that for him the
consolations, the greater
affair was hardly over. Song lyrics referring to their night together would
become the desire for, and
keep up the aesthetic atmosphere long after he had left town. No wonder
feeling of love. Love also
grows if one of the lovers women kept coming back for more. This was not a sexual affair, a tawdry
shows anger to the other, one-nighter, but a heightened moment in the woman's life. And his care-
for a lover is at once sorely
free attitude made it impossible to feel guilty; thoughts of one's mother or
afraid that a partner's

[PAGE 451]
Beware the Aftereffects • 423
husband would not spoil the illusion. Ellington was never defensive or
wrath when roused may
apologetic about his appetite for women; it was his nature and never the harden indefinitely. Love
fault of the woman that he was unfaithful. And if he could not help his de- again experiences increase
when genuine jealousy
sires, how could she hold him responsible? It was impossible to hold a
preoccupies one of the
grudge against such a man or complain about his behavior. lovers, for jealousy is called
Ellington was an Aesthetic Rake, a type whose obsession with women the nurturer of love. In fact
even if the lover is
can only be satisfied by endless variety. A normal man's tomcatting will
oppressed not by genuine
eventually land him in hot water, but the Aesthetic Rake rarely stirs up ugly jealousy but by base
emotions. After he seduces a woman, there is neither an integration nor a suspicion, love always
increases because of it, and
sacrifice. He keeps them hanging and hoping. The spell is not broken the
becomes more powerful by
next day, because the Aesthetic Rake makes the separation a pleasant, even
its own strength.
elegant experience. The spell Ellington cast on a woman never went away.
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS
The lesson is simple: keep the moments after the seduction and the ON LOVE, TRANSLATED
separation in the same key as before, heightened, aesthetic, and pleasant. If BY P. G. WALSH
you do not act guilty for your feckless behavior, it is hard for the other per-
son to feel angry or resentful. Seduction is a lighthearted game, in which
you invest all of your energy in the moment. The separation should be You've seen the fire that
lighthearted and stylish as well: it is work, travel, some dreaded responsi- smolders \ Down to
nothing, grows a crown of
bility that calls you away. Create a memorable experience and then move
pale ash \ Over its hidden
on, and your victim will most likely remember the delightful seduction, embers (yet a sprinkling of
not the separation. You will have made no enemies, and will have a lifelong sulphur \ Will suffice to
harem of lovers to whom you can always return when you feel so inclined. rekindle the flame)? \ So
with the heart. It grows
torpid from lack of worry, \
Needs a sharp stimulus to
4. In 1899, twenty-year-old Baroness Frieda von Richthofen married an elicit love. \ Get her
anxious about you, reheat
Englishman named Ernest Weekley, a professor at the University of Not-
her tepid passions, \ Tell
tingham, and soon settled into the role of the professor's wife. Weekley her your guilty secrets,
treated her well, but she grew bored with their quiet life and his tepid love- watch her blanch. \ Thrice
fortunate that man, lucky
making. On trips home to Germany she had a few love affairs, but this
past calculation, \ Who can
wasn't what she wanted either, and so she returned to being faithful and make some poor injured
caring for their three children. girl \ Torture herself over
him, lose voice, go pale,
One day in 1912, a former student of Weekley's, David Herbert
pass out when \ The
Lawrence, paid a visit to the couple's house. A struggling writer, Lawrence unwelcome news reaches
wanted the professor's professional advice. He was not home yet so Frieda her. Ah, may I \ Be the
entertained him. She had never met such an intense young man. He talked one whose hair she tears
out in her fury, the one
of his impoverished youth, his inability to understand women. And he lis-
whose \ Soft cheeks she rips
tened attentively to her own complaints. He even scolded her for the bad with her nails, \ Whom she
tea she had made him—somehow, even though she was a baroness, this ex- sees, eyes glaring, through
a rain of tears; without
cited her.
whom, \ Try as she will,
Lawrence returned for later visits, but now to see Frieda, not Weekley. she cannot live! \ How long
One day he confessed to her that he had fallen deeply in love with her. She (you may ask) should you
leave her lamenting her
admitted to similar feelings, and proposed they find a trysting spot. Instead
wrong? A little \ While
Lawrence had a proposal of his own: Leave your husband tomorrow—leave only, lest rage gather
him for me. What about the children? Frieda asked. If the children are strength \ Through
procrastination. By then
more important than our love, Lawrence replied, then stay with them. But
you should have her
if you don't run away with me within a few days, you will never see me
sobbing \ All over your

[PAGE 452]
424 • The Art of Seduction
chest, your arms tight again. To Frieda the choice was horrific. She did not care at all about her
around her neck. \ You husband, but the children were what she lived for. Even so, a few days later,
want peace? Give her
she succumbed to Lawrence's proposal. How could she resist a man who
kisses, make love to the girl
while she's crying— \ was willing to ask for so much, to take such a gamble? If she refused she
That's the only way to would always wonder, for such a man only passes once through your life.
melt her angry mood.
The couple left England and headed for Germany. Frieda would men-
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE, tion sometimes how much she missed her children, but Lawrence had no
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
patience with her: You are free to go back to them at any moment, he
would say, but if you stay, don't look back. He took her on an arduous
mountaineering trip in the Alps. A baroness, she had never experienced
such hardship, but Lawrence was firm: if two people are in love, why should
comfort matter?
In 1914, Frieda and Lawrence were married, but over the following
years the same pattern repeated. He would scold her for her laziness, the
nostalgia for her children, her abysmal housekeeping. He would take her
on trips around the world, on very little money, never letting her settle
down, although it was her fondest wish. They fought and fought. Once in
New Mexico, in front of friends, he yelled at her, "Take that dirty cigarette
out of your mouth! And stop sticking out that fat belly of yours!" "You'd
better stop that talk or I'll tell about your things," she yelled back. (She had
learned to give him a taste of his own medicine.) They both went outside.
Their friends watched, worried it might turn violent. They disappeared from
sight only to reappear moments later, arm in arm, laughing and mooning
over one another. That was the most disconcerting thing about the Law-
rences: married for years, they often behaved like infatuated newlyweds.
Interpretation. When Lawrence first met Frieda, he could sense right away
what her weakness was: she felt trapped, in a stultifying relationship and a
pampered life. Her husband, like so many husbands, was kind, but never
paid enough attention to her. She craved drama and adventure, but was too
lazy to get it on her own. Drama and adventure were just what Lawrence
would provide. Instead of feeling trapped, she had the freedom to leave
him at any moment. Instead of ignoring her, he criticized her constantly—
at least he was paying attention, never taking her for granted. Instead of
comfort and boredom, he gave her adventure and romance. The fights he
picked with ritualistic frequency also ensured nonstop drama and the space
for a powerful reconciliation. He inspired a touch of fear in her, which
kept her off balance, never quite sure of him. As a result, the relationship
never grew stale. It kept renewing itself.
If it is integration you are after, seduction must never stop. Otherwise
boredom will creep in. And the best way to keep the process going is often
to inject intermittent drama. This can be painful—opening old wounds,
stirring up jealousy, withdrawing a little. (Do not confuse this behavior
with nagging or carping criticism—this pain is strategic, designed to break
up rigid patterns.) On the other hand it can also be pleasant: think about

[PAGE 453]
Beware the Aftereffects • 425
proving yourself all over again, paying attention to nice little details, creat-
ing new temptations. In fact you should mix the two aspects, for too much
pain or pleasure will not prove seductive. You are not repeating the first se-
duction, for the target has already surrendered. You are simply supplying
little jolts, little wake-up calls that show two things: you have not stopped
trying, and they cannot take you for granted. The little jolt will stir up the
old poison, stoke the embers, bring you temporarily back to the beginning,
when your involvement had a most pleasant freshness and tension.
Remember: comfort and security are the death of seduction. A shared
journey with a little bit of hardship will do more to create a deep bond
than will expensive gifts and luxuries. The young are right to not care
about comfort in matters of love, and when you return to that sentiment, a
youthful spark will reignite.
5. In 1652, the famous French courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos met and fell in
love with the Marquis de Villarceaux. Ninon was a libertine; philosophy
and pleasure were more important to her than love. But the marquis in-
spired new sensations: he was so bold, so impetuous, that for once in her
life she let herself lose a little control. The marquis was possessive, a trait
she normally abhorred. But in him it seemed natural, almost charming: he
simply could not help himself. And so Ninon accepted his conditions:
there were to be no other men in her life. For her part she told him that she
would accept no money or gifts from him. This was to be about love, noth-
ing else.
She rented a house opposite his in Paris, and they saw each other daily.
One afternoon the marquis suddenly burst in and accused her of having
another lover. His suspicions were unfounded, his accusations absurd, and
she told him so. This did not satisfy him, and he stormed out. The next day
Ninon received news that he had fallen quite ill. She was deeply con-
cerned. As a desperate recourse, a sign of her love and submission, she de-
cided to cut off her beautiful long hair, for which she was famous, and send
it to him. The gesture worked, the marquis recovered, and they resumed
their affair still more passionately. Friends and former lovers complained of
her sudden transformation into the devoted woman, but she did not care—
she was happy.
Now Ninon suggested that they go away together. The marquis, a mar-
ried man, could not take her to his château, but a friend offered his own in
the country as a refuge for the lovers. Weeks became months, and their lit-
tle stay turned into a prolonged honeymoon. Slowly, though, Ninon had
the feeling that something was wrong: the marquis was acting more like
a husband. Although he was as passionate as before, he seemed so con-
fident, as if he had certain rights and privileges that no other man could
expect. The possessiveness that once had charmed her began to seem
oppressive. Nor did he stimulate her mind. She could get other men, and
equally handsome ones, to satisfy her physically without all that jealousy.

[PAGE 454]
426 • The Art of Seduction
Once this realization set in, Ninon wasted no time. She told the mar-
quis that she was returning to Paris, and that it was over for good. He
begged and pleaded his case with much emotion—how could she be so
heartless? Although moved, Ninon was firm. Explanations would only
make it worse. She returned to Paris and resumed the life of a courtesan.
Her abrupt departure apparently shook up the marquis, but apparently not
too badly, for a few months later word reached her that he had fallen in love
with another woman.
Interpretation. A woman often spends months pondering the subtle
changes in her lover's behavior. She might complain or grow angry; she
might even blame herself. Under the weight of her complaints, the man
may change for a while, but an ugly dynamic and endless misunderstand-
ings will ensue. What is the point of all of this? Once you are disenchanted
it is really too late. Ninon could have tried to figure out what had disen-
chanted her—the good looks that now bored her, the lack of mental stimu-
lation, the feeling of being taken for granted. But why waste time figuring
it out? The spell was broken, so she moved on. She did not bother to ex-
plain, to worry about de Villarceaux's feelings, to make it all soft and easy
for him. She simply left. The person who seems so considerate of the
other, who tries to mend things or make excuses, is really just timid. Being
kind in such matters can be rather cruel. The marquis was able to blame
everything on his mistress's heartless, fickle nature. His vanity and pride in-
tact, he could easily move on to another affair and put her behind him.
Not only does the long, lingering death of a relationship cause your
partner needless pain, it will have long-term consequences for you as well,
making you more skittish in the future, and weighing you down with guilt.
Never feel guilty, even if you were both the seducer and the one who now
feels disenchanted. It is not your fault. Nothing can last forever. You have
created pleasure for your victims, stirring them out of their rut. If you
make a clean quick break, in the long run they will appreciate it. The more
you apologize, the more you insult their pride, stirring up negative feelings
that will reverberate for years. Spare them the disingenuous explanations
that only complicate matters. The victim should be sacrificed, not tortured.
6. After fifteen years under the rule of Napoleon Bonaparte, the French
were exhausted. Too many wars, too much drama. When Napoleon was
defeated in 1814, and was imprisoned on the island of Elba, the French
were more than ready for peace and quiet. The Bourbons—the royal family
deposed by the revolution of 1789—returned to power. The king was
Louis XVIII; he was fat, boring, and pompous, but at least there would be
peace.
Then, in February of 1815, news reached France of Napoleon's dra-
matic escape from Elba, with seven small ships and a thousand men. He

[PAGE 455]
Beware the Aftereffects • 427
could head for America, start all over, but instead he was just crazy enough
to land at Cannes. What was he thinking? A thousand men against all the
armies of France? He set off toward Grenoble with his ragtag army. One at
least had to admire his courage, his insatiable love of glory and of France.
Then, too, the French peasantry were spellbound at the sight of their
former emperor. This man, after all, had redistributed a great deal of land
to them, which the new king was trying to take back. They swooned at the
sight of his famous eagle standards, revivals of symbols from the revolution.
They left their fields and joined his march. Outside Grenoble, the first of
the troops that the king sent to stop Napoleon caught up with him.
Napoleon dismounted and walked on foot toward them. "Soldiers of the
Fifth Army Corps!" he cried out. "Don't you know me? If there is one
among you who wishes to kill his emperor, let him come forward and do
so. Here I am!" He threw open his gray cloak, inviting them to take aim.
There was a moment of silence, and then, from all sides, cries rang out of
"Vive l'Empereur!" In one stroke, Napoleon's army had doubled in size.
The march continued. More soldiers, remembering the glory he had
given them, changed sides. The city of Lyons fell without a battle. Generals
with larger armies were dispatched to stop him, but the sight of Napoleon
at the head of his troops was an overwhelmingly emotional experience for
them, and they switched allegiance. King Louis fled France, abdicating in
the process. On March 20, Napoleon reentered Paris and returned to the
palace he had left only thirteen months before—all without having had to
fire a single shot.
The peasantry and the soldiers had embraced Napoleon, but Parisians
were less enthusiastic, particularly those who had served in his government.
They feared the storms he would bring. Napoleon ruled the country for
one hundred days, until the allies and his enemies from within defeated
him. This time he was shipped off to the remote island of St. Helena,
where he was to die.
Interpretation. Napoleon always thought of France, and his army, as a tar-
get to be wooed and seduced. As General de Ségur wrote of Napoleon: "In
moments of sublime power, he no longer commands like a man, but se-
duces like a woman." In the case of his escape from Elba, he planned a
bold, surprising gesture that would titillate a bored nation. He began his re-
turn to France among the people who would be most receptive to him: the
peasantry who had revered him. He revived the symbols—the revolution-
ary colors, the eagle standards—that would stir up the old sentiments. He
placed himself at the head of his army, daring his former soldiers to fire on
him. The march on Paris that brought him back to power was pure theater,
calculated for emotional effect every step of the way. What a contrast this
former amour presented to the dolt of a king who now ruled them.
Napoleon's second seduction of France was not a classical seduction,
following the usual steps, but a re-seduction. It was built on old emotions

[PAGE 456]
428 • The Art of Seduction
and revived an old love. Once you have seduced a person (or a nation)
there is almost always a lull, a slight letdown, which sometimes leads to a
separation; it is surprisingly easy, though, to re-seduce the same target. The
old feelings never go away, they lie dormant, and in a flash you can take
your target by surprise.
It is a rare pleasure to be able to relive the past, and one's youth—to feel
the old emotions. Like Napoleon, add a dramatic flair to your re-seduction:
revive the old images, the symbols, the expressions that will stir memory.
Like the French, your targets will tend to forget the ugliness of the separa-
tion and will remember only the good things. You should make this second
seduction bold and quick, giving your targets no time to reflect or wonder.
Like Napoleon, play on the contrast to their current lover, making his or
her behavior seem timid and stodgy by comparison.
Not everyone will be receptive to a re-seduction, and some moments
will be inappropriate. When Napoleon came back from Elba, the Parisians
were too sophisticated for him, and could see right through him. Unlike
the peasants of the South, they already knew him well; and his reentry
came too soon, they were too worn out by him. If you want to re-seduce
someone, choose one who does not know you so well, whose memories of
you are cleaner, who is less suspicious by nature, and who is dissatisfied
with present circumstances. Also, you might want to let some time pass.
Time will restore your luster and make your faults fade away. Never see a
separation or sacrifice as final. With a little drama and planning, a victim
can be retaken in no time.
Symbol: Em-
bers, the remains of the fire on the
morning after. Left to themselves, the embers will
slowly die out. Do not leave the fire to chance and to the
elements. To put it out, douse it, suffocate it, give it nothing to
feed on. To bring it back to life, fan it, stoke it, until it blazes
anew. Only your constant attention and vigilance will keep it burning.

[PAGE 457]
Beware the Aftereffects • 429
Reversal
To keep a person enchanted, you will have to re-seduce them con-
stantly. But you can allow a little familiarity to creep in. The target
wants to feel that he or she is getting to know you. Too much mystery will
create doubt. It will also be tiring for you, who will have to sustain it. The
point is not to remain completely unfamiliar but rather, on occasion, to jolt
victims out of their complacency, surprising them as you surprised them in
the past. Do this right and they will have the delightful feeling that they are
constantly getting to know more about you—but never too much.

[PAGE 458]


[PAGE 459]
Appendix A
Seductive Environment/Seductive Time
In se-
duction, your vic-
tims must slowly come
to feel an inner change.
Under your influence, they
lower their defenses, feeling free to
act differently, to be a different per-
son. Certain places, environments,
and experiences will greatly aid you in
your quest to change and transform the
seduced. Spaces with a theatrical,
heightened quality—opulence, glittering
surfaces, a playful spirit—create a buoy-
ant, childlike feeling that make it hard
for the victim to think straight. The cre-
ation of an altered sense of time has a
similar effect—memorable, dizzying
moments that stand out, a mood of
festival and play. You must make
your victims feel that being
with you gives them a dif-
ferent experience from
being in the real
world.

[PAGE 460]


[PAGE 461]
Festival Time and Place
Centuries ago, life in most cultures was filled with work and routine.
But at certain moments in the year, this life was interrupted by festi-
val. During these festivals—saturnalias of ancient Rome, the maypole festi-
vals of Europe, the great potlatches of the Chinook Indians—work in the
fields or marketplace stopped. The entire tribe or town gathered in a sacred
space set apart for the festival. Temporarily relieved of duty and responsi-
bility, people were granted license to run amok; they would wear masks or
costumes, which gave them other identities, sometimes those of powerful
figures reenacting the great myths of their culture. The festival was a
tremendous release from the burdens of daily life. It altered people's sense
of time, bringing moments in which they stepped outside of themselves.
Time seemed to stand still. Something like this experience can still be
found in the world's great surviving carnivals.
The festival represented a break in a person's daily life, a radically differ-
ent experience from routine. On a more intimate level, that is how you
must envision your seductions. As the process advances, your targets expe-
rience a radical difference from daily life—a freedom from work or respon-
sibility. Plunged into pleasure and play, they can act differently, can become
someone else, as if they were wearing a mask. The time you spend with
them is devoted to them and nothing else. Instead of the usual rotation of
work and rest, you are giving them grand, dramatic moments that stand
out. You bring them to places unlike the places they see in daily life—
heightened, theatrical places. Physical environment strongly affects people's
moods; a place dedicated to pleasure and play insinuates thoughts of plea-
sure and play. When your victims return to their duties and to the real
world, they feel the contrast strongly and they will start to crave that other
place into which you have drawn them. What you are essentially creating is
festival time and place, moments when the real world stops and fantasy
takes over. Our culture no longer supplies such experiences, and people
yearn for them. That is why almost everyone is waiting to be seduced and
why they will fall into your arms if you play this right.
The following are key components to reproducing festival time and place:
Create theatrical effects. Theater creates a sense of a separate, magical
world. The actors' makeup, the fake but alluring sets, the slightly unreal
433

[PAGE 462]
434 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment /Seductive Time
costumes—these heightened visuals, along with the story of the play, create
illusion. To produce this effect in real life, you must fashion your clothes,
makeup, and attitude to have a playful, artificial, edge—a feeling that you
have dressed for the pleasure of your audience. This is the goddesslike effect
of a Marlene Dietrich, or the fascinating effect of a dandy like Beau Brum-
mel. Your encounters with your targets should also have a sense of drama,
achieved through the settings you choose and through your actions. The
target should not know what will happen next. Create suspense through
twists and turns that lead to the happy ending; you are performing. When-
ever your targets meet you, they are returned to this vague feeling of being
in a play. You both have the thrill of wearing masks, of playing a different
role from the one your life has allotted you.
Use the visual language of pleasure. Certain kinds of visual stimuli signal
that you are not in the real world. You want to avoid images that have
depth, which might provoke thought, or guilt; instead, you should work in
environments that are all surface, full of glittering objects, mirrors, pools of
water, a constant play of light. The sensory overload of these spaces creates
an intoxicating, buoyant feeling. The more artificial, the better. Show your
targets a playful world, full of the sights and sounds that excite the baby or
child within them. Luxury—the sense that money has been spent or even
wasted—adds to the feeling that the real world of duty and morality has
been banished. Call it the brothel effect.
Keep it crowded or close. People crowding together raise the psychologi-
cal temperature to hothouse levels. Festivals and carnivals depend on the
contagious feeling a crowd creates. Bring your target to such environments
sometimes, to lower their normal defensiveness. Similarly, any kind of
situation that brings people together in a small space for a long period of
time is extremely conducive to seduction. For years, Sigmund Freud had a
small, tight-knit stable of disciples who attended his private lectures and
who engaged in an astonishing number of love affairs. Either lead the se-
duced into a crowded, festivallike environment or go trolling for targets in a
closed world.
Manufacture mystical effects. Spiritual or mystical effects distract people's
minds from reality, making them feel elevated and euphoric. From here it
is but a small step to physical pleasure. Use whatever props are at hand—
astrology books, angelic imagery, mystical-sounding music from some far-
off culture. The great eighteenth-century Austrian charlatan Franz Mesmer
filled his salons with harp music, the perfume of exotic incense, and a fe-
male voice singing in a distant room. On the walls he put stained glass and

[PAGE 463]
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 435
mirrors. His dupes would feel relaxed, uplifted, and as they sat in the room
where he used magnets for their healing powers, they would feel a kind of
spiritual tingling pass from body to body. Anything vaguely mystical helps
block out the real world, and it is easy to move from the spiritual to the
sexual.
Distort their sense of time—speed and youth. Festival time has a kind of
speed and frenzy that make people feel more alive. Seduction should make
the heart beat faster, so that the seduced loses track of time passing. Take
them to places of constant activity and movement. Embark with them on
some kind of journey together, distracting their minds with new sights.
Youth may fade and disappear, but seduction brings the feeling of being
young, no matter the age of those involved. And youth is mostly energy.
The pace of the seduction must pick up at a certain moment, creating
a whirling effect in the mind. It is no wonder that Casanova did much of
his seducing at balls, or that the waltz was the preferred tool of many a
nineteenth-century rake.
Create moments. Everyday life is a drudgery in which the same actions
endlessly repeat. The festival, on the other hand, we remember as a mo-
ment when everything was transformed—when a little bit of eternity and
myth entered our lives. Your seduction must have such peaks, moments
when something dramatic happens and time is experienced differently.
You must give your targets such moments, whether by staging the seduc-
tion in a place—a carnival, a theater—where they naturally occur or by
creating them yourself, with dramatic actions that stir up strong emo-
tions. Those moments should be pure leisure and pleasure—no thoughts
of work or morality can intrude. Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of
King Louis XV, had to re-seduce her easily bored lover every few months;
intensely creative, she devised parties, balls, games, a little theater at Ver-
sailles. The seduced revels in affairs like this, sensing the effort you have ex-
pended to divert and enchant them.
Scenes from Seductive Time and Place
1. Around the year 1710, a young man whose father was a prosperous
wine dealer in Osaka, Japan, found himself daydreaming more and more.
He worked night and day for his father, and the burden of family life and
all of its duties was oppressive. Like every young man, he had heard of the
pleasure districts of the city—the quarters where the normally strict laws of
the shogunate could be violated. It was here that you would find the ukiyo,
the "floating world" of transient pleasures, a place where actors and courte-

[PAGE 464]
436 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time
sans ruled. This was what the young man was daydreaming about. Biding
his time, he managed to find an evening when he could slip out unnoticed.
He headed straight for the pleasure quarters.
This was a cluster of buildings—restaurants, exclusive clubs, tea-
houses—that stood out from the rest of the city by their magnificence and
color. The moment the young man stepped into it, he knew he was in
a different world. Actors wandered the streets in elaborately dyed kimonos.
They had such manners and attitudes, as if they were still on stage. The
streets bustled with energy; the pace was fast. Bright lanterns stood out
against the night, as did the colorful posters for the nearby kabuki theater.
The women had a completely different air about them. They stared at him
brazenly, acting with the freedom of a man. He caught sight of an onnagata,
one of the men who played female roles in the theater—a man more beau-
tiful than most women he had seen and whom the passersby treated like
royalty.
The young man saw other young men like himself entering a teahouse,
so he followed them in. Here the highest class of courtesans, the great
tayus, plied their trade. A few minutes after the young man sat down, he
heard a noise and bustle, and down the stairs came a few of the tayus, fol-
lowed by musicians and jesters. The women's eyebrows were shaved, re-
placed by a thick black painted line. Their hair was swept up in a perfect
fold, and he had never seen such beautiful kimonos. The tayus seemed to
float across the floor, using different kinds of steps (suggestive, creeping,
cautious, etc.), depending on whom they were approaching and what they
wanted to communicate to him. They ignored the young man; he had no
idea how to invite them over, but he noticed that some of the older men
had a way of bantering with them that was a language all its own. The
wine began to flow, music was played, and finally some lower-level courte-
sans came in. By then the young man's tongue was loosened. These courtesans
were much friendlier and the young man began to lose all track of time.
Later he managed to stagger home, and only the next morning did he real-
ize how much money he had spent. If father ever found out . . .
Yet a few weeks later he was back. Like hundreds of such sons in Japan
whose stories filled the literature of the period, he was on the path toward
squandering his father's wealth on the "floating world."
Seduction is another world into which you initiate your victims. Like the
ukiyo, it depends on a strict separation from the day-to-day world. When
your victims are in your presence, the outside world—with its morality, its
codes, its responsibilities—is banished. Anything is allowed, particularly
anything normally repressed. The conversation is lighter and more sugges-
tive. Clothes and places have a touch of theatricality. The license exists to
act differently, to be someone else, without any heaviness or judging. It is a
kind of concentrated psychological "floating world" that you create for the
others, and it becomes addictive. When they leave you and return to their
routines, they are doubly aware of what they are missing. The moment

[PAGE 465]
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 437
they crave the atmosphere you have created, the seduction is complete. As
in the floating world, money is to be wasted. Generosity and luxury go
hand in hand with a seductive environment.
2. It began in the early 1960s: people would come to Andy Warhol's New
York studio, soak up the atmosphere, and stay awhile. Then in 1963, the
artist moved into a new Manhattan space and a member of his entourage
covered some of the walls and pillars in tin foil and spray-painted a brick
wall and other things silver. A red quilted couch in the center, some five-
foot-high plastic candy bars, a turntable that glittered with tiny mirrors, and
helium-filled silver pillows that floated in the air completed the set. Now
the L-shaped space became known as The Factory, and a scene began to
develop. More and more people started showing up—why not just leave
the door open, Andy reasoned, and come what may. During the day, while
Andy would work on his paintings and films, people would gather—actors,
hustlers, drug dealers, other artists. And the elevator would keep groaning
all night as the beautiful people began to make the place their home. Here
might be Montgomery Clift, nursing a drink by himself; over there, a
beautiful young socialite chatting with a drag queen and a museum curator.
They kept pouring in, all of them young and glamorously dressed. It was
like one of those children's shows on TV, Andy once said to a friend, where
guests keep dropping in on the endless party and there's always some new
bit of entertainment. And that was indeed what it seemed like—with noth-
ing serious happening, just lots of talk and flirting and flashbulbs popping
and endless posing, as if everyone were in a film. The museum curator
would begin to giggle like a teenager and the socialite would flounce about
like a hooker.
By midnight everyone would be packed together. You could hardly
move. The band would arrive, the light show would begin, and it would all
careen in a new direction, wilder and wilder. Somehow the crowd would
disperse at some point, then in the afternoon it would all start up again
as the entourage trickled back. Hardly anyone went to The Factory just
once.
It is oppressive always to have to act the same way, playing the same boring
role that work or duty imposes on you. People yearn for a place or a mo-
ment when they can wear a mask, act differently, be someone else. That is
why we glorify actors: they have the freedom and playfulness in relation to
their own ego that we would love to have. Any environment that offers a
chance to play a different role, to be an actor, is immensely seductive. It can
be an environment that you create, like The Factory. Or a place where you
take your target. In such environments you simply cannot be defensive; the
playful atmosphere, the sense that anything is allowed (except seriousness),
dispels any kind of reactiveness. Being in such a place becomes a drug. To
re-create the effect, remember Warhol's metaphor of the children's TV

[PAGE 466]
438 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time
show. Keep everything light and playful, full of distractions, noise, color,
and a bit of chaos. No weight, responsibilities, or judgments. A place to
lose yourself in.
3. In 1746, a seventeen-year-old girl named Cristina had come to the city
of Venice, Italy, with her uncle, a priest, in search of a husband. Cristina
was from a small village but had a substantial dowry to offer. The Venetian
men who were willing to marry her, however, did not please her. So after
two weeks of futile searching, she and her uncle prepared to return to their
village. They were seated in their gondola, about to leave the city, when
Cristina saw an elegantly dressed young man walking toward them.
"There's a handsome fellow!" she said to her uncle. "I wish he was in the
boat with us." The gentleman could not have heard this, yet he approached,
handed the gondolier some money, and sat down beside Cristina, much to
her delight. He introduced himself as Jacques Casanova. When the priest
complimented him on his friendly manners, Casanova replied, "Perhaps I
should not have been so friendly, my reverend father, if I had not been at-
tracted by the beauty of your niece."
Cristina told him why they had come to Venice and why they were
leaving. Casanova laughed and chided her—a man cannot decide to marry
a girl after seeing her for a few days. He must know more about her charac-
ter; it would take at least six months. He himself was looking for a wife,
and he explained to her why he had been as disappointed by the girls he
had met as she had been disappointed by the men. Casanova seemed to
have no destination; he simply accompanied them, entertaining Cristina
the whole way with witty conversation. When the gondola arrived at the
edge of Venice, Casanova hired a carriage to the nearby city of Treviso and
invited them to join him. From there they could catch a chaise to their vil-
lage. The uncle accepted, and on the way to their carriage, Casanova of-
fered his arm to Cristina. What would his mistress say if she saw them, she
asked. "I have no mistress," he answered, "and I shall never have one again,
for I shall never find such a pretty girl as you—no, not in Venice." His
words went to her head, filling it with all kinds of strange thoughts, and she
began to talk and act in a manner that was new to her, becoming almost
brazen. What a pity she could not stay in Venice for the six months he
needed to get to know a girl, she told Casanova. Without hesitation he of-
fered to pay her expenses in Venice for that period while he courted her.
On the carriage ride she turned this offer over in her mind, and once in
Treviso she got her uncle alone and begged him to return to the village by
himself, then come back for her in a few days. She was in love with
Casanova; she wanted to know him better; he was a perfect gentleman,
who could be trusted. The uncle agreed to do as she wished.
The following day Casanova never left her side. There was not the
slightest hint of disagreement in his nature. They spent the day wandering
around the city, shopping and talking. He took her to a play in the evening

[PAGE 467]
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 439
and to the casino after that, supplying her with a domino and a mask. He
gave her money to gamble and she won. By the time the uncle returned to
Treviso, she had all but forgotten about her marriage plans—all she could
think of was the six months she would spend with Casanova. But she re-
turned to her village with her uncle and waited for Casanova to visit her.
He showed up a few weeks later, bringing with him a handsome young
man named Charles. Alone with Cristina, Casanova explained the situa-
tion: Charles was the most eligible bachelor in Venice, a man who would
make a much better husband than he would. Cristina admitted to Casanova
that she too had had her doubts. He was too exciting, had made her think
of other things besides marriage, things she was ashamed of. Perhaps it was
for the better. She thanked him for taking such pains to find her a husband.
Over the next few days Charles courted her, and they were married several
weeks later. The fantasy and allure of Casanova, however, remained in her
mind forever.
Casanova could not marry—it was against everything in his nature. But it
was also against his nature to force himself on a young girl. Better to leave
her with the perfect fantasy image than to ruin her life. Besides, he enjoyed
the courting and flirting more than anything else.
Casanova supplied a young woman with the ultimate fantasy. While he
was in her orbit he devoted every moment to her. He never mentioned
work, allowing no boring, mundane details to interrupt the fantasy. And he
added great theater. He wore the most spectacular outfits, full of sparkling
jewels. He led her to the most wonderful entertainments—carnivals,
masked balls, the casinos, journeys with no destination. He was the great
master at creating seductive time and environment.
Casanova is the model to aspire to. While in your presence your targets
must sense a change. Time has a different rhythm—they barely notice its
passing. They have the feeling that everything is stopping for them, just as
all normal activity comes to a halt at a festival. The idle pleasures you pro-
vide them are contagious—one leads to another and to another, until it is
too late to turn back.

[PAGE 468]


[PAGE 469]
Appendix B
Soft Seduction: How to Sell
Anything to the Masses
The less you seem to be
selling something—including yourself—the better. By be-
ing too obvious in your pitch, you will raise suspicion; you will also bore
your audience, an unforgivable sin. Instead, make your approach soft, seductive, and
insidious. Soft: be indirect. Create news and events for the media to pick up, spreading your
name in a way that seems spontaneous, not hard or calculated. Seductive: keep it entertaining.
Your name and image are bathed in positive associations; you are selling pleasure and prom-
ise. Insidious: aim at the unconscious, using images that linger in the mind, placing
your message in the visuals. Frame what you are selling as part of a new
trend, and it will become one. It is almost impossible to
resist the soft seduction.

[PAGE 470]


[PAGE 471]
The Soft Sell
Seduction is the ultimate form of power. Those who give in to it do so
willingly and happily. There is rarely any resentment on their part; they
forgive you any kind of manipulation because you have brought them plea-
sure, a rare commodity in the world. With such power at your fingertips,
though, why stop at the conquest of a man or woman? A crowd, an elec-
torate, a nation can be brought under your sway simply by applying on a
mass level the tactics that work so well on an individual. The only differ-
ence is the goal—not sex but influence, a vote, people's attention—and the
degree of tension. When you are after sex, you deliberately create anxiety, a
touch of pain, twists, and turns. Seduction on the mass level is more diffuse
and soft. Creating a constant titillation, you fascinate the masses with what
you are offering. They pay attention to you because it is pleasant to do so.
Let us say your goal is to sell yourself—as a personality, a trendsetter, a
candidate for office. There are two ways to go: the hard sell (the direct ap-
proach) and the soft sell (the indirect approach). In the hard sell you state
your case strongly and directly, explaining why your talents, your ideas,
your political message are superior to anyone else's. You tout your achieve-
ments, quote statistics, bring in expert opinions, even go so far as to induce
a bit of fear if the audience ignores your message. The approach is a tad ag-
gressive and might have unwanted consequences: some people will be of-
fended, resisting your message, even if what you say is true. Others will feel
you are manipulating them—who can trust experts and statistics, and why
are you trying so hard? You will also grate on people's nerves, becoming
unpleasant to listen to. In a world in which you cannot succeed without
selling to large numbers, the direct approach won't take you far.
The soft sell, on the other hand, has the potential to draw in millions
because it is entertaining, gentle on the ears, and can be repeated with-
out irritating people. The technique was invented by the great charlatans
of seventeenth-century Europe. To peddle their elixirs and alchemic
concoctions, they would first put on a show—clowns, music, vaudeville-
type routines—that had nothing to do with what they were selling. A
crowd would form, and as the audience laughed and relaxed, the charlatan
would come onstage and briefly and dramatically discuss the miraculous ef-
fects of the elixir. By honing this technique, the charlatans discovered that
instead of selling a few dozen bottles of the dubious medicine, they were
suddenly selling scores or even hundreds.
443

[PAGE 472]
444 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
In the centuries since, publicists, advertisers, political strategists, and
others have taken this method to new heights, but the rudiments of the soft
sell remain the same. First bring pleasure by creating a positive atmosphere
around your name or message. Induce a warm, relaxed feeling. Never seem
to be selling something—that will look manipulative and suspicious. In-
stead, let entertainment value and good feelings take center stage, sneaking
the sale through the side door. And in that sale, you do not seem to be sell-
ing yourself or a particular idea or candidate; you are selling a life-style, a
good mood, a sense of adventure, a feeling of hipness, or a neatly packaged
rebellion.
Here are some of the key components of the soft sell.
Appear as news, never as publicity. First impressions are critical. If
your audience first sees you in the context of an advertisement or publicity
item, you instantly join the mass of other advertisements screaming for
attention—and everyone knows that advertisements are artful manipula-
tions, a kind of deception. So, for your first appearance in the public eye,
manufacture an event, some kind of attention-getting situation that the
media will "inadvertently" pick up as if it were news. People pay more at-
tention to what is broadcast as news—it seems more real. You suddenly
stand out from everything else, if only for a moment—but that moment
has more credibility than hours of advertising time. The key is to orches-
trate the details thoroughly, creating a story with dramatic impact and
movement, tension and resolution. The media will cover it for days. Con-
ceal your real purpose—to sell yourself—at any cost.
Stir basic emotions. Never promote your message through a rational, di-
rect argument. That will take effort on your audience's part and will not
gain its attention. Aim for the heart, not the head. Design your words and
images to stir basic emotions—lust, patriotism, family values. It is easier to
gain and hold people's attention once you have made them think of their
family, their children, their future. They feel stirred, uplifted. Now you
have their attention and the space to insinuate your true message. Days later
the audience will remember your name, and remembering your name is
half the game. Similarly, find ways to surround yourself with emotional
magnets—war heroes, children, saints, small animals, whatever it takes.
Make your appearance bring these emotionally positive associations to
mind, giving you extra presence. Never let these associations be defined or
created for you, and never leave them to chance.
Make the medium the message. Pay more attention to the form of your
message than to the content. Images are more seductive than words, and vi-
suals—soothing colors, appropriate backdrop, the suggestion of speed

[PAGE 473]
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 445
or movement—should actually be your real message. The audience may
focus superficially on the content or moral you are preaching, but they are
really absorbing the visuals, which get under their skin and stay there longer
than any words or preachy pronouncements. Your visuals should have a
hypnotic effect. They should make people feel happy or sad, depending on
what you want to accomplish. And the more they are distracted by visual
cues, the harder it will be for them to think straight or see through your
manipulations.
Speak the target's language—be chummy. At all costs, avoid appearing
superior to your audience. Any hint of smugness, the use of complicated
words or ideas, quoting too many statistics—all that is fatal. Instead, make
yourself seem equal to your targets and on intimate terms with them. You
understand them, you share their spirit, their language. If people are cynical
about the manipulations of advertisers and politicians, exploit their cyni-
cism for your own purposes. Portray yourself as one of the folk, warts and
all. Show that you share your audience's skepticism by revealing the tricks
of the trade. Make your publicity as down-home and minimal as possible,
so that your competitors look sophisticated and snobby in comparison.
Your selective honesty and strategic weakness will get people to trust you.
You are the audience's friend, an intimate. Enter their spirit and they will
relax and listen to you.
Start a chain reaction—everyone is doing it. People who seem to be de-
sired by others are immediately more seductive to their targets. Apply this
to the soft seduction. You need to act as if you have already excited crowds
of people; your behavior will become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Seem to be
in the vanguard of a trend or life-style and the public will lap you up for
fear of being left behind. Spread your image, with a logo, slogans, posters,
so that it appears everywhere. Announce your message as a trend and it will
become one. The goal is to create a kind of viral effect in which more and
more people become infected with the desire to have whatever you are of-
fering. This is the easiest and most seductive way to sell.
Tell people who they are. It is always unwise to engage an individual or
the public in any kind of argument. They will resist you. Instead of trying
to change people's ideas, try to change their identity, their perception of
reality, and you will have far more control of them in the long run. Tell
them who they are, create an image, an identity that they will want to as-
sume. Make them dissatisfied with their current status. Making them un-
happy with themselves gives you room to suggest a new life-style, a new
identity. Only by listening to you can they find out who they are. At the
same time, you want to change their perception of the world outside them

[PAGE 474]
446 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
by controlling what they look at. Use as many media as possible to create a
kind of total environment for their perceptions. Your image should be seen
not as an advertisement but as part of the atmosphere.
Some Soft Seductions
1. Andrew Jackson was a true American hero. In 1814, in the Battle of
New Orleans, he led a ragtag band of American soldiers against a superior
English army and won. He also conquered Indians in Florida. Jackson's
army loved him for his rough-hewn ways: he fed on acorns when there was
nothing else to eat, he slept on a hard bed, he drank hard cider, just like his
men. Then, after he lost or was cheated out of the presidential election of
1824 (in fact he won the popular vote, but so narrowly that the election
was thrown into the House of Representatives, which chose John Quincy
Adams, after much deal making), he retired to his farm in Tennessee, where
he lived the simple life, tilling the soil, reading the Bible, staying far from
the corruptions of Washington. Where Adams had gone to Harvard, played
billiards, drunk soda water, and relished European finery, Jackson, like
many Americans of the time, had been raised in a log cabin. He was an un-
educated man, a man of the earth.
This, at any rate, was what Americans read in their newspapers in the
months after the controversial 1824 election. Spurred on by these articles,
people in taverns and halls across the country began talking of how the war
hero Andrew Jackson had been wronged, how an insidious aristocratic elite
was conspiring to take over the country. So when Jackson declared that he
would run again against Adams in the presidential election of 1828—but
this time as the leader of a new organization, the Democratic Party—the
public was thrilled. Jackson was the first major political figure to have a
nickname, Old Hickory, and soon Hickory clubs were sprouting up in
America's towns and cities. Their meetings resembled spiritual revivals. The
hot-button issues of the day were discussed (tariffs, the abolition of slav-
ery), and club members felt certain that Jackson was on their side. It was
hard to know for sure—he was a little vague on the issues—but this elec-
tion was about something larger than issues: it was about restoring democ-
racy and restoring basic American values to the White House.
Soon the Hickory clubs were sponsoring events like town barbecues,
the planting of hickory trees, dances around a hickory pole. They orga-
nized lavish public feasts, always including large quantities of liquor. In the
cities there were parades, and these were stirring events. They often took
place at night so that urbanites would witness a procession of Jackson sup-
porters holding torches. Others would carry colorful banners with portraits
of Jackson or caricatures of Adams and slogans ridiculing his decadent
ways. And everywhere there was hickory—hickory sticks, hickory brooms,
hickory canes, hickory leaves in people's hats. Men on horseback would

[PAGE 475]
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 447
ride through the crowd, spurring people into "huzzahs!" for Jackson. Oth-
ers would lead the crowd in songs about Old Hickory.
The Democrats, for the first time in an election, conducted opinion
polls, finding out what the common man thought about the candidates.
These polls were published in the papers, and the overwhelming conclu-
sion was that Jackson was ahead. Yes, a new movement was sweeping the
country. It all came to a head when Jackson made a personal appearance in
New Orleans as part of a celebration commemorating the battle he had
fought so bravely there fourteen years earlier. This was unprecedented: no
presidential candidate had ever campaigned in person before, and in fact
such an appearance would have been considered improper. But Jackson
was a new kind of politician, a true man of the people. Besides, he insisted
that his purpose for the visit was patriotism, not politics. The spectacle
was unforgettable—Jackson entering New Orleans on a steamboat as the
fog lifted, cannon fire ringing out from all sides, grand speeches, endless
feasts, a kind of mass delirium taking over the city. One man said it was
"like a dream. The world has never witnessed so glorious, so wonderful a
celebration—never have gratitude and patriotism so happily united."
This time the will of the people prevailed. Jackson was elected president.
And it was not one region that brought him victory: New Englanders,
Southerners, Westerners, merchants, farmers, and workers were all infected
with the Jackson fever.
Interpretation. After the debacle of 1824, Jackson and his supporters were
determined to do things differently in 1828. America was becoming more
diverse, developing populations of immigrants, Westerners, urban laborers,
and so on. To win a mandate Jackson would have to overcome new re-
gional and class differences. One of the first and most important steps his
supporters took was to found newspapers all around the country. While he
himself seemed to have retired from public life, these papers promulgated
an image of him as the wronged war hero, the victimized man of the peo-
ple. In truth, Jackson was wealthy, as were all of his major backers. He
owned one of the largest plantations in Tennessee, and he owned many
slaves. He drank more fine liquor than hard cider and slept on a soft bed
with European linens. And while he might have been uneducated, he was
extremely shrewd, with a shrewdness built on years of army combat.
The image of the man of the earth disguised all this, and, once it was
established, it could be contrasted with the aristocratic image of Adams. In
this way Jackson's strategists covered up his political inexperience and made
the election turn on questions of character and values. Instead of politi-
cal issues they raised trivial matters like drinking habits and church atten-
dance. To keep up the enthusiasm they staged spectacles that seemed to
be spontaneous celebrations but in fact were carefully choreographed. The
support for Jackson seemed to be a movement, as evidenced (and advanced)

[PAGE 476]
448 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
by the opinion polls. The event in New Orleans—hardly nonpolitical, and
Louisiana was a swing state—bathed Jackson in an aura of patriotic, quasi-
religious grandeur.
Society has fractured into smaller and smaller units. Communities are
less cohesive; even individuals feel more inner conflict. To win an election
or to sell anything in large numbers, you have to paper over these differ-
ences somehow—you have to unify the masses. The only way to accom-
plish this is to create an inclusive image, one that attracts and excites people
on a basic, almost unconscious level. You are not talking about the truth, or
about reality; you are forging a myth.
Myths create identification. Build a myth about yourself and the com-
mon people will identify with your character, your plight, your aspirations,
just as you identify with theirs. This image should include your flaws, high-
light the fact that you are not the best orator, the most educated man, the
smoothest politician. Seeming human and down to earth disguises the
manufactured quality of your image. To sell this image you need to have
the proper vagueness. It is not that you avoid talk of issues and details—that
will make you seem insubstantial—but that all your talk of issues is framed
within the softer context of character, values, and vision. You want to
lower taxes, say, because it will help families—and you are a family person.
You must not only be inspiring but also entertaining—that is a popular,
friendly touch. This strategy will infuriate your opponents, who will try to
unmask you, reveal the truth behind the myth; but that will only make
them seem smug, overserious, defensive, and snobbish. That now becomes
part of their image, and it will help sink them.
2. On Easter Sunday, March 31, 1929, New York churchgoers began to
pour onto Fifth Avenue after the morning service for the annual Easter pa-
rade. The streets were blocked off, and as had been the custom for years,
people were wearing their finest outfits, women in particular showing off
the latest in spring fashions. But this year the promenaders on Fifth Avenue
noticed something else. Two young women were coming down the steps of
Saint Thomas's Church. At the bottom they reached into their purses, took
out cigarettes—Lucky Strikes—and lit up. Then they walked down the
avenue with their escorts, laughing and puffing away. A buzz went through
the crowd. Women had only recently begun smoking cigarettes, and it was
considered improper for a lady to be seen smoking in the street. Only a
certain kind of woman would do that. These two, however, were elegant
and fashionable. People watched them intently, and were further astounded
several minutes later when they reached the next church along the avenue.
Here two more young ladies—equally elegant and well bred—left the
church, approached the two holding cigarettes, and, as if suddenly inspired
to join them, pulled out Lucky Strikes of their own and asked for a light.
Now the four women were marching together down the avenue. They
were steadily joined by more, and soon ten young women were holding

[PAGE 477]
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 449
cigarettes in public, as if nothing were more natural. Photographers ap-
peared and took pictures of this novel sight. Usually at the Easter parade,
people would have been whispering about a new hat style or the new
spring color. This year everyone was talking about the daring young
women and their cigarettes. The next day, photographs and articles ap-
peared in the papers about them. A United Press dispatch read, "Just as
Miss Federica Freylinghusen, conspicuous in a tailored outfit of dark grey,
pushed her way thru the jam in front of St. Patrick's, Miss Bertha Hunt and
six colleagues struck another blow in behalf of the liberty of women.
Down Fifth Avenue they strolled, puffing at cigarettes. Miss Hunt issued
the following communique from the smoke-clouded battlefield: 'I hope
that we have started something and that these torches of freedom, with no
particular brand favored, will smash the discriminatory taboo on cigarettes
for women and that our sex will go on breaking down all discriminations.' "
The story was picked up by newspapers around the country, and soon
women in other cities began to light up in the streets. The controversy
raged for weeks, some papers decrying this new habit, others coming to the
women's defense. A few months later, though, public smoking by women
had become a socially acceptable practice. Few people bothered to protest
it anymore.
Interpretation. In January 1929, several New York debutantes received the
same telegram from a Miss Bertha Hunt: "In the interests of equality of the
sexes ... I and other young women will light another torch of freedom by
smoking cigarettes while strolling on Fifth Avenue Easter Sunday." The
debutantes who ended up participating met beforehand in the office where
Hunt worked as a secretary. They planned what churches to appear at, how
to link up with each other, all the details. Hunt handed out packs of Lucky
Strikes. Everything worked to perfection on the appointed day.
Little did the debutantes know, though, that the whole affair had been
masterminded by a man—Miss Hunt's boss, Edward Bernays, a public rela-
tions adviser to the American Tobacco Company, makers of Lucky Strike.
American Tobacco had been luring women into smoking with all kinds of
clever ads, but the consumption was limited by the fact that smoking in the
street was considered unladylike. The head of American Tobacco had asked
Bernays for his help and Mr. Bernays had obliged him by applying a tech-
nique that was to become his trademark: gain public attention by creating
an event that the media would cover as news. Orchestrate every detail but
make them seem spontaneous. As more people heard of this "event," it
would spark imitative behavior—in this case more women smoking in the
streets.
Bernays, a nephew of Sigmund Freud and perhaps the greatest public
relations genius of the twentieth century, understood a fundamental law of
any kind of sell. The moment the targets know you are after something—a
vote, a sale—they become resistant. But disguise your sales pitch as a news

[PAGE 478]
450 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
event and not only will you bypass their resistance, you can also create a so-
cial trend that does the selling for you. To make this work, the event you set
up must stand out from all the other events that are covered by the media,
yet it cannot stand out too far or it will seem contrived. In the case of the
Easter parade, Bernays (through Bertha Hunt) chose women who would
seem elegant and proper even with their cigarettes in their hands. Yet in
breaking a social taboo, and doing so as a group, such women would create
an image so dramatic and startling that the media would be unable to pass it
up. An event that is picked up by the news has the imprimatur of reality.
It is important to give this manufactured event positive associations, as
Bernays did in creating a feeling of rebellion, of women banding together.
Associations that are patriotic, say, or subtly sexual, or spiritual—anything
pleasant and seductive—take on a life of their own. Who can resist? People
essentially persuade themselves to join the crowd without even realizing
that a sale has taken place. The feeling of active participation is vital to se-
duction. No one wants to feel left out of a growing movement.
3. In the presidential campaign of 1984, President Ronald Reagan, run-
ning for reelection, told the public, "It's morning again in America." His
presidency, he claimed, had restored American pride. The recent, successful
Olympics in Los Angeles were symbolic of the country's return to strength
and confidence. Who could possibly want to turn the clock back to 1980,
which Reagan's predecessor, Jimmy Carter, had termed a time of malaise?
Reagan's Democratic challenger, Walter Mondale, thought Americans
had had enough of the Reagan soft touch. They were ready for honesty,
and that would be Mondale's appeal. Before a nationwide television audi-
ence, Mondale declared, "Let's tell the truth. Mr. Reagan will raise taxes,
and so will I. He won't tell you. I just did." He repeated this straightfor-
ward approach on numerous occasions. By October his poll numbers had
plunged to all-time lows.
The CBS News reporter Lesley Stahl had been covering the campaign,
and as Election Day neared, she had an uneasy feeling. It wasn't so much
that Reagan had focused on emotions and moods rather than hard issues. It
was more that the media was giving him a free ride; he and his election
team, she felt, were playing the press like a fiddle. They always managed to
get him photographed in the perfect setting, looking strong and presiden-
tial. They fed the press snappy headlines along with dramatic footage of
Reagan in action. They were putting on a great show.
Stahl decided to assemble a news piece that would show the public how
Reagan used television to cover up the negative effects of his policies. The
piece began with a montage of images that his team had orchestrated over
the years: Reagan relaxing on his ranch in jeans; standing tall at the Nor-
mandy invasion tribute in France; throwing a football with his Secret Ser-
vice bodyguards; sitting in an inner-city classroom. . . . Over these images
Stahl asked, "How does Ronald Reagan use television? Brilliantly. He's

[PAGE 479]
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 451
been criticized as the rich man's president, but the TV pictures say it isn't
so. At seventy-three, Mr. Reagan could have an age problem. But the TV
pictures say it isn't so. Americans want to feel proud of their country again,
and of their president. And the TV pictures say you can. The orchestration
of television coverage absorbs the White House. Their goal? To emphasize
the president's greatest asset, which, his aides say, is his personality. They
provide pictures of him looking like a leader. Confident, with his Marlboro
man walk."
Over images of Reagan shaking hands with handicapped athletes in
wheelchairs and cutting the ribbon at a new facility for seniors, Stahl con-
tinued, "They also aim to erase the negatives. Mr. Reagan tried to counter
the memory of an unpopular issue with a carefully chosen backdrop that
actually contradicts the president's policy. Look at the handicapped Olym-
pics, or the opening ceremony of an old-age home. No hint that he tried
to cut the budgets for the disabled and for federally subsidized housing for
the elderly." On and on went the piece, showing the gap between the feel-
good images that played on the screen and the reality of Reagan's actions.
"President Reagan," Stahl concluded, "is accused of running a campaign in
which he highlights the images and hides from the issues. But there's no
evidence that the charges will hurt him because when people see the presi-
dent on television, he makes them feel good, about America, about them-
selves, and about him."
Stahl depended on the good will of the Reagan people in covering the
White House, but her piece was strongly negative, so she braced herself for
trouble. Yet a senior White House official telephoned her that evening:
"Great piece," he said. "What?" asked a stunned Stahl. "Great piece," he re-
peated. "Did you listen to what I said?" she asked. "Lesley, when you're
showing four and a half minutes of great pictures of Ronald Reagan, no
one listens to what you say. Don't you know that the pictures are overriding
your message because they conflict with your message? The public sees
those pictures and they block your message. They didn't even hear what
you said. So, in our minds, it was a four-and-a-half-minute free ad for the
Ronald Reagan campaign for reelection."
Interpretation. Most of the men who worked on communications for
Reagan had a background in marketing. They knew the importance of
telling a story crisply, sharply, and with good visuals. Each morning they
went over what the headline of the day should be, and how they could
shape this into a short visual piece, getting the president into a video op-
portunity. They paid detailed attention to the backdrop behind the presi-
dent in the Oval Office, to the way the camera framed him when he was
with other world leaders, and to having him filmed in motion, with his
confident walk. The visuals carried the message better than any words
could do. As one Reagan official said, "What are you going to believe, the
facts or your eyes?"

[PAGE 480]
452 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
Free yourself from the need to communicate in the normal direct man-
ner and you will present yourself with greater opportunities for the soft
sell. Make the words you say unobtrusive, vague, alluring. And pay much
greater attention to your style, the visuals, the story they tell. Convey a
sense of movement and progress by showing yourself in motion. Express
confidence not through facts and figures but through colors and positive
imagery, appealing to the infant in everyone. Let the media cover you un-
guided and you are at their mercy. So turn the dynamic around—the press
needs drama and visuals? Provide them. It is fine to discuss issues or "truth"
as long as you package it entertainingly. Remember: images linger in the
mind long after words are forgotten. Do not preach to the public—that
never works. Learn to express your message through visuals that insinuate
positive emotions and happy feelings.
4. In 1919, the movie press agent Harry Reichenbach was asked to do ad-
vance publicity for a picture called The Virgin of Stamboul. It was the usual
romantic potboiler in an exotic locale, and normally a publicist would
mount a campaign with alluring posters and advertisements. But Harry
never operated the usual way. He had begun his career as a carnival barker,
and there the only way to get the public into your tent was to stand out
from the other barkers. So Harry dug up eight scruffy Turks whom he
found living in Manhattan, dressed them up in costumes (flowing sea-green
trousers, gold-crescented turbans) provided by the movie studio, rehearsed
them in every line and gesture, and checked them into an expensive hotel.
Word quickly spread to the newspapers (with a little help from Harry) that
a delegation of Turks had arrived in New York on a secret diplomatic
mission.
Reporters converged on the hotel. Since his appearance in New York
was clearly no longer a secret, the head of the mission, "Sheikh Ali Ben
Mohammed," invited them up to his suite. The newspapermen were im-
pressed by the Turks' colorful outfits, salaams, and rituals. The sheikh then
explained why he had come to New York. A beautiful young woman
named Sari, known as the Virgin of Stamboul, had been betrothed to the
sheikh's brother. An American soldier passing through had fallen in love
with her and had managed to steal her from her home and take her to
America. Her mother had died from grief. The sheikh had found out she
was in New York, and had come to bring her back.
Mesmerized by the sheikh's colorful language and by the romantic tale
he told, the reporters filled the papers with stories of the Virgin of Stam-
boul for the next several days. The sheikh was filmed in Central Park and
feted by the cream of New York society. Finally "Sari" was found, and the
press reported the reunion between the sheikh and the hysterical girl (an
actress with an exotic look). Soon after, The Virgin of Stamboul opened in
New York. Its story was much like the "real" events reported in the papers.
Was this a coincidence? A quickly made film version of the true story? No

[PAGE 481]
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 453
one seemed to know, but the public was too curious to care, and The Virgin
of Stamboul broke box office records.
A year later Harry was asked to publicize a film called The Forbidden
Woman. It was one of the worst movies he had ever seen. Theater owners
had no interest in showing it. Harry went to work. For eighteen days
straight he ran an ad in all of the major New York newspapers: WATCH THE
SKY ON THE NIGHT OF FEBRUARY 21ST! IF IT IS GREEN—GO THE CAPITOL IF
IT IS RED—GO THE RIVOLI IF IT IS PINK—GO TO THE STRAND IF IT IS BLUE—
GO TO THE RIALTO FOR ON FEBRUARY 21ST THE SKY WILL TELL YOU WHERE
THE BEST SHOW IN TOWN CAN BE SEEN! (The Capitol, the Rivoli, the
Strand, and the Rialto were the four big first-run movie houses on Broad-
way.) Almost everyone saw the ad and wondered what this fabulous show
was. The owner of the Capitol asked Harry if he knew anything about it,
and Harry let him in on the secret: it was all a publicity stunt for an un-
booked picture. The owner asked to see a screening of The Forbidden
Woman; through most of the film, Harry yakked about the publicity cam-
paign, distracting the man from the dullness onscreen. The theater owner
decided to show the film for a week, and so, on the evening of Febru-
ary 21, as a heavy snowstorm blanketed the city and all eyes turned to the
sky, giant rays of light poured out from the tallest buildings—a brilliant
show of green. An enormous crowd flocked to the Capitol theater. Those
who did not get in kept coming back. Somehow, with a packed house and
an excited crowd, the film did not seem quite so bad.
The following year Harry was asked to publicize a gangster picture
called Outside the Law. On high-ways across the country he set up billboards
that read, in giant letters, IF YOU DANCE ON SUNDAY, YOU ARE OUTSIDE THE
LAW. On other billboards the word "dance" was replaced by "play golf" or
"play pool" and so on. On a top corner of the billboards was a shield bear-
ing the initials "PD." The public assumed this meant "police department"
(actually, it stood for Priscilla Dean, the star of the movie) and that the
police, backed by religious organizations, were prepared to enforce
decades-old blue laws prohibiting "sinful" activities on a Sunday. Suddenly
a controversy was sparked. Theater owners, golfing associations, and dance
organizations led a countercampaign against the blue laws; they put up their
own billboards, exclaiming that if you did those things on Sunday, you
were not "OUTSIDE THE LAW" and issuing a call for Americans to have some
fun in their lives. For weeks the words "Outside the Law" were everywhere
seen and everywhere on people's lips. In the midst of this the film
opened—on a Sunday—in four New York theaters simultaneously, some-
thing that had never happened before. And it ran for months throughout
the country, also on Sundays. It was one of the big hits of the year.
Interpretation. Harry Reichenbach, perhaps the greatest press agent in
movie history, never forgot the lessons he had learned as a barker. The car-
nival is full of bright lights, color, noise, and the ebb and flow of the

[PAGE 482]
454 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
crowd. Such environments have profound effects on people. A clearheaded
person could probably tell that the magic shows are fake, the fierce animals
trained, the dangerous stunts relatively safe. But people want to be enter-
tained; it is one of their greatest needs. Surrounded by color and excite-
ment, they suspend their disbelief for a while and imagine that the magic
and danger are real. They are fascinated by what seems to be both fake and
real at the same time. Harry's publicity stunts merely re-created the carnival
on a larger scale. He pulled people in with the lure of colorful costumes, a
great story, irresistible spectacle. He held their attention with mystery, con-
troversy, whatever it took. Catching a kind of fever, as they would at the
carnival, they flocked without thinking to the films he publicized.
The lines between fiction and reality, news and entertainment are even
more blurred today than in Harry Reichenbach's time. What opportunities
that presents for soft seduction! The media is desperate for events with en-
tertainment value, inherent drama. Feed that need. The public has a weak-
ness for what seems both realistic and slightly fantastical—for real events
with a cinematic edge. Play to that weakness. Stage events the way Bernays
did, events the media can pick up as news. But here you are not starting a
social trend, you are after something more short term: to win people's at-
tention, to create a momentary stir, to lure them into your tent. Make your
events and publicity stunts plausible and somewhat realistic, but make their
colors a little brighter than usual, the characters larger than life, the drama
higher. Provide an edge of sex and danger. You are creating a confluence of
real life and fiction—the essence of any seduction.
It is not enough, however, to win people's attention: you need to hold
it long enough to hook them. This can always be done by sparking contro-
versy, the way Harry liked to stir up debates about morals. While the media
argues about the effect you are having on people's values, it is broadcasting
your name everywhere and inadvertently bestowing upon you the edge
that will make you so attractive to the public.

[PAGE 483]
Selected Bibliography
Baudrillard, Jean. Seduction. Trans. Brian Singer. New York: St. Martin's Press,
1990.
Bourdon, David. Warhol. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1989.
Capellanus, Andreas. Andreas Capellanus on Love. Trans. P. G. Walsh. London: Ger-
ald Duckworth & Co. Ltd., 1982.
Casanova, Jacques. The Memoirs of Jacques Casanova, in eight volumes. Trans. Arthur
Machen. Edinburgh: Limited Editions Club, 1940.
Chalon, Jean. Portrait of a Seductress: The World of Natalie Barney. Trans. Carol
Barko. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc., 1979.
Cole, Hubert. First Gentleman of the Bedchamber: The Life of Louis-François Armand,
Maréchal Duc de Richelieu. New York: Viking, 1965.
de Troyes, Chrétien. Arthurian Romances. Trans. William W Kibler. London: Pen-
guin Books, 1991.
Feher, Michel, ed. The Libertine Reader: Eroticism and Enlightenment in
Eighteenth-Century France. New York: Zone Books, 1997.
Flynn, Errol. My Wicked, Wicked Ways. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1959.
Freud, Sigmund. Psychological Writings and Letters. Ed. Sander L. Gilman. New
York: The Continuum Publishing Company, 1995.
——. Sexuality and the Psychology of Love. Ed. Philip Rieff. New York: Touch-
stone, 1963.
Fülöp-Miller, René. Rasputin: The Holy Devil. New York: Viking, 1962.
George, Don. Sweet Man: The Real Duke Ellington. New York: G. P. Putnam's
Sons, 1981.
Gleichen-Russwurm, Alexander von. The World's Lure: Fair Women, Their Loves,
Their Power, Their Fates. Trans. Hannah Waller. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1927.
Hahn, Emily. Lorenzo: D. H. Lawrence and the Women Who Loved Him. Philadel-
phia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1975.
455

[PAGE 484]
456 • Selected Bibliography
Hellmann, John. The Kennedy Obsession: The American Myth of JFK. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1997.
Kaus, Gina. Catherine: The Portrait of an Empress. Trans. June Head. New York:
Viking, 1935.
Kierkegaard, Søren. The Seducer's Diary, in Either/Or, Part 1. Trans. Howard V.
Hong & Edna H. Hong. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987.
Lao, Meri. Sirens: Symbols of Seduction. Trans. John Oliphant of Rossie. Rochester,
VT: Park Street Press, 1998.
Lindholm, Charles. Charisma. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell, Ltd., 1990.
Ludwig, Emil. Napoleon. Trans. Eden & Cedar Paul. Garden City, NY: Garden
City Publishing Co., 1926.
Mandel, Oscar, ed. The Theatre of Don Juan: A Collection of Plays and Views,
1630-1963. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1963.
Maurois, Andre. Byron. Trans. Hamish Miles. New York: D. Appleton & Com-
pany, 1930.
——. Disraeli: A Picture of the Victorian Age. Trans. Hamish Miles. New York:
D. Appleton & Company, 1928.
Monroe, Marilyn. My Story. New York: Stein and Day, 1974.
Morin, Edgar. The Stars. Trans. Richard Howard. New York: Evergreen Profile
Book, 1960.
Ortiz, Alicia Dujovne. Eva Perdu. Trans. Shawn Fields. New York: St. Martin's
Press, 1996.
Ovid. The Erotic Poems. Trans. Peter Green. London: Penguin Books, 1982.
——. Metamorphoses. Trans. Mary M. Innes. Baltimore, MD: Penguin Books,
1955.
Peters, H. F. My Sister, My Spouse: A Biography of Lou Andreas-Salomé. New York:
W. W. Norton, 1962.
Plato. The Symposium. Trans. Walter Hamilton. London: Penguin Books, 1951.
Reik, Theodor. Of Love and Lust: On the Psychoanalysis of Romantic and Sexual Emo-
tions. New York: Farrar, Strauss and Cudahy, 1957.
Rose, Phyllis. Jazz Cleopatra: Josephine Baker and Her Time. New York: Vintage
Books, 1991.
Sackville-West, Vita. Saint Joan of Arc. London: Michael Joseph Ltd., 1936.
Shikibu, Murasaki. The Tale of Genji. Trans. Edward G. Seidensticker. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1979.
Shu-Chiung. Yang Kuei-Fei: The Most Famous Beauty of China. Shanghai, China:
Commercial Press, Ltd., 1923.
Smith, Sally Bedell. Reflected Glory: The Life of Pamela Churchill Harriman. New
York: Touchstone, 1996.
Stendhal. Love. Trans. Gilbert and Suzanne Sale. London: Penguin Books, 1957.
Terrill, Ross. Madame Mao: The White-Boned Demon. New York: Touchstone,
1984.
Trouncer, Margaret. Madame Récamier. London: Macdonald & Co., 1949.
Wadler, Joyce. Liaison. New York: Bantam Books, 1993.
Weber, Max. Essays in Sociology. Ed. Hans Gerth & C. Wright Mills. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1946.
Wertheimer, Oskar von. Cleopatra: A Royal Voluptuary. Trans. Huntley Patterson.
Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1931.

[PAGE 485]
Index
Abrantès, Duchess d', 14 brutes, 134, 137-38 vulgarians, 135—36
absences, see calculated absences bumblers, 135, 138-40 windbags, 135, 145
Adams, Cindy, 221-23 complaining by, 135, 293, 378, Antony and Cleopatra (Shakespeare),
Adams, John Quincy, 446-48 418, 421 267-68, 418
advertisements, xx, 444 crab as symbol of, 144 anxiety and discontent, inducement
Aesthetic Rakes, 423 defensiveness in, 57 of, 203-10, 236, 255, 376-77,
Aga Khan III, 313 as deliberate disenchantment, 415, 378, 418
aggressive attention, 257 418-20 Cupid's arrow as symbol of, 210
Aging Babies, 156-57 disengagement from, 145 deceptive appearances and, 207
Agnelli, Gianni, 273 doormats, 134 exotic stranger as, 208-9
Alberoni, Francesco, 205 examples of, 136-44 lost ideals in, 203, 209-10
Albert, Prince of Monaco, 396, 397 excessive pride in, 142 missing qualities in, 207, 208-9
Alcibiades, 46-47, 48, 74-76, greed in, 142-43 personal criticism in, 205-7, 208,
191-92, 243-44 impatience in, 134, 137—38 209, 210, 423, 424
Alexander I, Czar of Russia, 216-17 inattentiveness of, 136—37, 145 by politicians, 209-10
Aly Khan, Prince, 313-15, 317 insecurity of, 131, 133, 138, 142 reversal of, 210
American Tobacco Company, judgmentalism in, 133, 134 strategic withdrawal in, 388-89,
448-50 moralizers, 134, 143-44 390, 391
Amores, The (Ovid), 253-54, 331, neediness in, 59, 74, 75, 134, 293 Aphrodite (Venus), 8, 9-11, 14, 43,
351-52 perfectionistic dissatisfaction in, 122-23, 206-7, 256-57, 259,
Andreas Capellanus, 134-35, 324, 140-41 269, 283, 403
422-23 reactors, 135 Apollo, 55-58
Andreas-Salomé, Lou, 45-47, 50, 52, self-absorption in, 75, 131, 133, Ardent Rakes, 19-21
76, 154, 197-99, 227, 357, 390, 137, 138, 140 arguing, 257, 260, 445
412 self-awareness lacked by, 131 Aristophanes, 47, 207
anger, 8, 9, 69, 76, 374 self-consciousness of, 135, 138—40 armed prophets, 118
Anger, Kenneth, 50 suffocators, 134 Arthur, King, 329
Anne of Austria, 355 tightwads, 134—35 Art of Love, The (Ovid), xx, xxii,
Anti-Seducers, xxiv, 3-4, 49, 65, types of, 133-36 xxiv, 81-82, 135-36, 179, 221,
131-45, 155 ulterior motives in, 142-43 255, 279-80, 323, 371-72, 397,
aggressive attention of, 257 ungenerosity of, 133, 134-35 408-9, 418-19, 423-44
arguing by, 260 uses of, 145 As You Like It (Shakespeare), 50
457

[PAGE 486]
458 • Index
Athene, 9-11 breakups, 369, 378 victims chosen by, 40, 172
attention, aggressive, 257 see also disenchantment Castiglione, Baldassare, 133-34,
attention, focused, 33, 273, 417 Brent, Harrison, 297-99 197-99, 272
of Charmers, 79, 81-82, 86, 87 Bride of Abydos, The (Byron), 353 Castro, Fidel, 102
in mirroring, 226 Brummel, George "Beau," 48-49, Catherine de Médicis, Queen of
physical lures and, 401-2 52, 192, 434 France, 15
Auguste, Prince of Prussia, 187-88 brutes, anti-seductive, 134, 137—38 Catherine II "the Great," Empress of
authentic animals, charismatic, 104-5 Buckingham, George Villiers, Duke Russia, 90-92, 93
of, 66, 235, 346-48, 355 contrast provided by, 201
Bacall, Lauren, 14 Bulliet, C.J., 47-48 Potemkin and, 274, 300-303
Baker, Josephine, 50, 61-63, 66 bumblers, anti-seductive, 135, 138-40 Saltykov and, 37-38, 225-26
calculated surprise by, 248 Buñuel, Luis, 373 Chalon, Jean, 361-62
French mirrored by, 225 Buruma, Ian, 336 Chambers, Jessie, 205-6, 208
banal conversation, 183 Bussy-Rabutin, Count, 324-25 Chaplin, Charlie, 58-59
Bank, The, 58 Butler, Samuel, 81 charisma, xx, xxi, 95, 97-98, 329
Barbey d'Aurevilly, Jules-Amédée, 49 Byron, George Gordon, Lord, 26, 70, Charismatics, 3, 95-118, 317
Barney, Natalie, xxiv, xxv, 154, 317, 153, 304 adventurousness of, 101-2
323 disarming weaknesses of, 290, 291 as armed prophets, 118
spiritual lures of, 361-63, 364, "honest" confessions of, 284 authentic animals, 104-5
365-66, 404 reputation of, 27, 193, 379 counterreactions to, 116-18
Barrymore, John, 109 taboos transgressed by, 351-54, dangers to, 116-18
Bataille, Georges, 374-75 355, 357 deliverers, 112—14
Bathsheba, xix, 237 "undertook" of, 217, 290, 403 demonic performers, 106-7
Baudelaire, Charles Pierre, 14, 46, drama saints, 110-12
170, 314-15, 354, 401-2 Caesar, Julius, xix, 7-8, 12, 13, 208, erotic fatigue and, 117-18
strategic withdrawal by, 385-88 283,317 fervency of, 101
Baudrillard, Jean, xxiii, 9, 126-27, assassination of, 258-61 gurus, 109-10
288,385 calculated absences, 288, 390, 392, lamp as symbol of, 11 6
Beauties, 156 415, 418 magnetism of, 98, 102
Beauty Ideal, 33-35 in pain mixed with pleasure, 372, miraculous prophets, 102-4
Belleroche, Maud de, 243-44 373-74 mysteriousness of, 95, 99
Bernays, Edward, 449—50 in poeticizing oneself, 277, 283-84 Olympian actors, 114-16
Bjerre, Poul, 47 calculated effects, 188, 190, 289 piercing gaze of, 95, 100-101, 102,
Blue Angel, The (film), 121-22 calculated surprises, 34-35, 241-50, 104
Blue Angel, The (Mann), 340-43 420-21, 429 prophetic gifts in, 99, 104
Boccaccio, Giovanni, 214-17, improvisation vs., 248 purposefulness of, 98-99
233-37, 362-67 mood changes as, 249 saintliness of, 99
bold moves, 405-13 personal character revealed by, saviors, 107-9
bracing effect of, 410 245-46 seductive language of, 99-100,
feminine, 412 in re-seduction, 420-21 108, 111, 114, 115-16
humility vs., 409-10 reversal of, 249 self-awareness of, 100
indirect approach preceding, 407-9 roller coaster as symbol of, 248 successors of, 118
infecting with emotions in, 412 sudden encounters in, 247-48 on television, 114, 115-16
opportune moment for, 410—1 1 Caligula, Emperor of Rome, 136 theatricality of, 100
as pleasant surprise, 411 Camus, Albert, 83 types of, 102-16
reversal of, 413 Canouville, Jules de, 326-27 uninhibitedness of, 100, 107
signs of readiness for, 408, 409, Capote, Truman, 71 vulnerability of, 101
411, 412 Carter, Angela, 281 Charles I, King of England, 355
summer storm as symbol of, 413 Carter, Jimmy, 202 Charles II, King of England, 201,
theatricality of, 411-12 Casanova, Giovanni Giacomo, xx, 420-21
vanity and, 408-9 xxii, xxiv, 31-33, 36, 128, 373 Charmers, 3, 79-93, 153, 210, 376
Bonaparte, Lucien, 187 anti-seducer encountered by, antagonism harmonized by, 82
Bonaparte, Napoleon, see Napoleon 142-43 art of, 81-83
I, Emperor of France calculated surprise of, 243-46, 247 dangers to, 93
Bonaparte, Pauline, 14, 200, 297-99, direct approach of, 184, 218 deceptive appearances and, 85
304-5, 326-27 indirect approach of, 182 derivation of term, 81
Book of Laughter and Forgetting, The mirroring by, 224 ease and comfort created by, 79,
(Kundera), 66 mixed signals and, 194 82, 86-87
Bourdon, David, 33-34 role playing of, 305 examples of, 83-92
Bouriscout, Bernard, 173-74, seductive environment and time focused attention of, 79, 81-82,
297-300, 304 created by, 435, 438-39 86, 87
Brantôme, Seigneur de, 139-41, spiritual lures used by, 367 indulgent attitude of, 79, 85, 418
268-69, 290-92, 409-10 temptation of, 236-37 mirror as symbol of, 92

[PAGE 487]
Index • 459
mirroring by, 82 Conquerors, 153—54 physical image of, 41, 43, 44, 45,
pleasure provided by, 82, 85 Conrad, Earl, 398-99 48-49, 50-51
politicians as, 81, 82, 83-85, 87, Constant, Benjamin, 188, 344 politicians as, 51
88-92, 93 contrasts, 201-2, 270-71, 274, 427, social seduction by, 48-50
self-possession in adversity shown 428, 447 visual style of, 48-49
by, 83 Cooper, Gary, 125 Dandy, The (Baudelaire), 46
sexuality and, 81, 87 Coquettes, 3, 67-68, 156, 172, 237, Dangerous Liaisons (Laclos), xxiv, 25,
subtlety of, 81 291, 412 127, 169-71, 287-89, 407-9,
timing of, 90-91, 92, 93 Cold, 71-73, 77, 78 418-20
understanding attitude of, 81 confusion engendered by, 75 dangerousness, 354
as useful to others, 83, 87 dangers to, 78 of Dandies, 43, 44
Chateaubriand, François René, Vi- excitement engendered by, 75 of Rakes, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27
comte de, 188, 226, 284, 337 hatred engendered by, 78 of Sirens, 5, 11, 12-13
ego ideal regression of, 343-46 Hot and Cold, 67, 69-71, 76, 78, D'Annunzio, Gabriele, 21-24, 192,
Chekhov, Michael, 10 192-93 291
Chevalier, Maurice, 395-96, 397 jealousy incited by, 76-77 death risked by, 327-29
Chiang Kai-shek, 88-90 keys to, 74-77 flattery by, 218, 259
Childe Harold (Byron), 351, 352 narcissism of, 67, 73, 74, 75, 76, march on Fiume led by, 23, 273,
China, xix, 15, 76, 88-90, 172-73, 77 328
174, 224, 267-69, 291, politicians as, 77 public spectacles given by, 275
297-300, 311-13 selective withdrawal by, 67, 70-71, Darvas, Lili, 123
chivalry, 36-37, 38, 329-30 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 390 d'Aunet, Léonie, 339
Choisy, Abbé de, 47-48 self-sufficiency of, 67, 71, 73, David, King, xix, 237
Chrétien de Troyes, 329-30, 386-87 74-75, 76, 77 Davis, Ossie, 113
Christian, Linda, 398-99, 401 shadow as symbol of, 77 Dean, James, 123, 125, 127, 128
Churchill, Pamela, see Harriman, space created by, 73 death, risking of, 327-29
Pamela Churchill timing of, 78 Decameron, The (Boccaccio), 214-17,
Churchill, Winston, 86, 115, 329 Coriolanus (Shakespeare), 107 233-37, 362-67
Clarissa (Richardson), 225, 315-16 courtesans, 11-12, 33, 38, 60-61, 75, defensiveness, 57, 83, 207, 21 1, 215,
Claudin, Gustave, 60 86, 192, 194, 291, 299-300, 219, 224, 246, 247, 260, 418,
Claudius I, Emperor of Rome, 361-64, 396, 412, 436 434
136-37 courtly love, 36-37, 325-26, 333 de Gaulle, Charles, 99, 100, 101-2,
Cleopatra, xix, xx, xxi, xxiv, 7-9, 13, Crébillon, 33 109, 114-16, 117,329
16, 184, 304, 378, 392, 412 Crébillon fils, 138-40, 401 seductive oratory of, 114, 115,
anti-seduction as defense against, criticism, personal, 205-7, 208, 209, 253-54
145 210, 423, 424 "Delight in Disorder" (Herrick), 399
clothing of, 7, 8, 274 cruelty, 192, 349, 353, 356-57, 377, deliverers, charismatic, 112-14
descriptions of, 8 379, 385, 390, 426 demonic performers, charismatic,
insecurity fostered by, 208 of Dandies, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47 106-7
isolation created by, 317 of Rakes, 26 Demonic Rakes, 21-24
mixed signals sent by, 192 in transgressing taboos, 349, 352, Denon, Vivant, 213-15
mood changes of, 7—8, 9 353, 356-57 destiny, sense of, 177, 359, 365
poeticizing of, 283 Crushed Stars, 152-53 details, attention to, 38, 265-76, 425
sensual appeals of, 159 Cures for Love (Ovid), 9, 172 banquet as symbol of, 276
theatricality of, 7, 8, 9 of clothing, 265, 268, 269, 270,
victims chosen by, 12, 172 Dandies, 3, 41-52, 75-76, 83, 153, 272, 273, 274
voice of, 7, 9, 14 192, 434 gifts in, 265, 268, 269, 274-75,
Clift, Montgomery, 51, 125, 437 aesthetic qualities in, 48-50, 51 279
clinging behavior, 415, 417, 419-20 ambiguity of, 41, 44, 45, 47, 51 mesmerizing effect of, 265,
Clinton, Bill, 26, 27, 93 bisexual appeal of, 50-51 267-69
clothing, xx, 34, 434, 436 confusion engendered by, 47 reversal of, 276
attention to details of, 265, 268, cruelty in, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47 sensuous effect of, 265, 269-72
269, 270, 272, 273, 274 dangerousness of, 43, 44 slower pace in, 272, 273-74
of Dandies, 43, 44, 48-49, 50, 51 dangers to, 52 of spectacles, 265, 267-69, 275
of Sirens, 7, 8, 13, 14-15, 274 excitement engendered by, 47 Devil Is a Woman, The, 373
Cohn, Norman, 103 Feminine, 43-45 Dewa, 37
Cold Coquette, The (Byron), 70 impudence of, 49, 51, 52 Diderot, Denis, xxiv-xxv
Colette, 48 keys to, 48-51 Dietrich, Marlene, 50, 121-23, 127,
complaining, 135, 293, 378, 418, Masculine, 45-48 128, 129, 130, 192, 342, 373,
421 mental transvestitism of, 50 434
confessions, "honest," 284, 285, nonconformity of, 46, 47, 48-49, DiMaggio, Joe, 11, 13
287-88, 289 51 Dio Cassius, 7
con men, 66 orchid as symbol of, 51 Dionysus, 8

[PAGE 488]
460 • Index
Diotima, 206-7, 208 Japan's ukiyo ("floating world") as, on suggestion, 215
Disappointed Dreamers, 150-51 435-37 on transference, 335-36
disenchantment, 415-29 mystical effects in, 434-35 on the uncanny, 126, 301-2, 304
clean quick breaks in, 415, 418, theatricality of, 431, 434-35, 436, Friedrich, Konrad, 297-99
425-26 439 Fröhlich, Rosa (fict.), 340-43
clinging behavior and, 415, 417, visual stimuli in, 434 Fu Chai, King, xix, 15, 311-13
419-20 Warhol's Factory as, 437-38 Fujiwara no Korechika, 48, 65, 271
deliberate, 415, 418-20 envy, 16, 28 Fülöp-Miller, René, 104-5
disillusionment in, 40 Epton, Nina, 326, 354, 355
embers as symbol of, 428 Eros. 206-7, 208 Gallese, Duke and Duchess of, 22
familiarity in, 415, 418, 421 erotic fatigue, 117—18 Game of Hearts, The: Harriette Wilson's
inertia in, 417-18 Escher, M. C., 128 Memoirs (Wilson), 48-49
pleasant separations in, 421-23 Essex, Robert Devereux, Earl of, 209 Gandhi, Mohandas K., 193, 358
see also re-seduction Euripides, xx isolation created by, 317
Disraeli, Benjamin, 49, 57, 81, Europa, 180-81 Garbo, Greta, 127
82-85, 93, 143-44, 210, 236 Exodus, Book of, 98 Garden of Eden, 24, 237
attention to details by, 274-75 Exotic Fetishists, 154-55 Gautier, Théophile, 49, 385
humor in persuasion by, 260 "Exotic Perfume" (Baudelaire), Genesis, Book of, 232-33
mirroring by, 225 401-2 Genji, Prince (fict.), 63-65, 172,
poeticizing by, 284 Eyes of Youth, 43 269-71
victim played by, 292 George, Don, 419-20
dissatisfaction, perfectionistic, 140-41 Fallaci, Oriana, 374-76 Gérard, François-Pascal, 187, 188
Don Juan, legend of, xx, 19-20, 23, falling in love, xix, xxi, xxii, 9, 36, Gilbert and Sullivan, 189
24-25, 155, 170, 207-8, 209, 39, 44, 45, 46, 50, 76, 97, 134, Gilda, 314
260, 400 149, 164, 205, 246, 377 Gillot, Henrik, 45
Don Juan (Byron), 290 familiarity, 429 Gilot, Françoise, 25
doormats, anti-seductive, 134 in disenchantment, 415, 418, 421 Girard, Rene, 199, 200
doubts, 215, 282-83, 321, 323, 324, poeticizing oneself vs., 277, 281, Gladstone, William, 85, 93, 143-44
383, 389, 390, 393, 409, 410, 282, 284 Gleichen-Russwurm, Alexander von,
429 fear, 412, 418, 424 xxi
Drama Queens, 155 in pain mixed with pleasure, 369, Goethe, Johann Wolfgang, 300-301,
drama saints, charismatic, 1 10-12 377-78, 379 354
Dream of the Red Chamber, The (Tsao Feminine Dandies, 43-45 golden age, childhood as, 53, 55, 59
Hsueh Chin), 224, 270-72 Ferenczi, Sandor, 126 Gottfried von Strassburg, 12, 190-92,
Drouet, Juliette, 339-40 festivals, 433, 434, 435 354-55
Dryden, John, 233 Fetishistic Stars, 121-23 Grammont, Count de, 137-38, 183,
Dulce y Sabrosa (Picón), 231-34 Fiume, march on, 23, 273, 328 324-25
dullness, deliberate, 183 flattery, 22, 85, 218, 233, 259, 289, Grant, Gary, 125, 128, 129
Dumas, Alexander, 385 376, 403 Graves, Robert, 9-11, 55-58, 231,
Duncan, Isadora, 22, 259 Flaubert, Gustave, 364-65, 385 287-88
Duse, Eleanor, 22, 259 Floating Genders, 160 Greco, Juliette, 313
"floating world" (ukiyo), 435-37 greed, 199
Eastern Love, 137, 171 Flowers of Evil, The (Baudelaire), anti-seductive, 142-43
Easy Street, 58 314-15, 386, 401-2 Greek Myths, The (Graves), 9-11,
Eddington, Nora, 399-400 Flynn, Errol, xxiv, 26, 130, 192, 201, 55-58, 231, 287-88
Edward VII, King of England, 396 291, 355 Greenfield, Liah, 102
ego ideal regression, 337-38, physical lures of, 397-402, 403, guilt, sense of, 176, 369, 378, 379,
343-46 404 422-23, 426
Einstein, Albert, 99 Tantrism practiced by, 410 in transgression of taboos, 349,
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 124, 174, Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, The, 355, 357
317 43 Guinevere, Queen, 329-30, 386-87
Eisenstein, Sergei, 59 Fraser, Flora, 300-301 gurus, charismatic, 109-10
Either/Or (Kierkegaard), 24, 256 French Revolution, 70, 116-17, 174, Gwyn, Nell, 201, 420-21
Elizabeth, Empress of Russia, 90, 91 187, 328
Elizabeth I, Queen of England, 75, Freud, Sigmund, 70-71, 173, 182, Hamilton, Lady Emma, 300-301,
84, 209, 346 188, 449 304
Ellington, Duke, xxiv, 182-83, 291, Andreas-Salomé and, 76, 198, 199 Hamilton, Sir William, 300-301, 304
419-20, 421-23 on bisexuality, 50 hard sell, 443
empathy, 81, 157 on childhood as golden age, 55 Harriman, Averell, 85-87, 273, 318
environment, seductive, 431-39 disciples of, 76-77, 198, 199, 434 Harriman, Pamela Churchill, 85-87,
Casanova's creation of, 435, on narcissism, 73, 74 273, 274, 318
438-39 on sexual taboos, 352-53 Hauptmann, Gerhart, 46
crowded conditions in, 434, 437 on spoiled children, 61 Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 74

[PAGE 489]
Index • 461
Hayworth, Rita, 313—15 impatience, anti-seductive, 134, Jackson, Andrew, 446-48
heat, projected, 393, 395-97 137-38 Jagger, Mick, 50
heated glances, 396, 397, 402, 403 improvisation, 164, 248, 411 James I, King of England, 66, 235,
Helen of Troy, xix, xx, 11, 13 in proving oneself, 324-25 355
Hellmann, John, 124, 209 imps, 56-57, 59-61, 66 reverse parental regression and,
Hera, 9-11, 256-58, 287-88 inattentiveness, 136-37, 145 346-48
Hermaphroditus, 43-45 indifference, 409 Japan, 25, 37, 48, 50
Hermes (Mercury), 9-10, 43, 55-58 indirect approach, 177-84, 408-9 child-rearing practices in, 335-36
Herrick, Robert, 399 bland appearance in, 183 ukiyo ("floating world") of, 435-37
Hibbert, Eloise Talcott, 172-73, bold moves after, 407-9 see also Tale of Genji, The
311-12 deliberate dullness in, 183 (Murasaki)
Hindu Art of Love, The (Windsor, disguising one's feelings in, 183 jealousy, 70, 76-77, 248, 390, 421,
ed.), 171-72, 411 friendship in, 177, 179-81, 182 423, 424, 425-26
Homer, 7-8, 11, 12-13, 256-58 illusion of control in, 181-82 in pain mixed with pleasure, 372,
"honest" confessions, 284, 285, neutral distance in, 182-83 373, 374, 377
287-88, 289 reversal of, 184 triangles and, 197-98
honest courtesans, 38 sexual tension and, 182 Jeffers, Robinson, 109
Hot and Cold Coquettes, 67, 69-71, spider's web as symbol of, 184 Joan of Arc, 102-4
76, 78 third parties in, 177, 183 Johnson, Lyndon B., 289
Hsi Shi, xix, 15, 311-13 see also soft sell Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor,
Hugo, Victor, 338-40 infantile regression, 336-37, 338-40 301-2
Huxley, Aldous, 109 innocents, 54, 58-59, 66 Josephine, Empress of France, xxiv,
hypnosis, 261-62, 401, 402 "In Praise of Makeup" (Baudelaire), 13, 69-71, 74, 154, 217, 412
14 languorousness of, 12, 14, 69
Ibarruri, Dolores Gómez (La Pasion- insecurities, 48, 71, 74, 76, 77, 87, selective disclosure by, 15, 237
aria), 99-100 154, 155, 156, 163, 172, 173, selective withdrawal by, 70, 78,
Ibn Hazm, 126, 183-84, 409 182, 193, 207, 210, 289, 291, 390
Ideal Lovers, 3, 29-40 359, 369, 377, 412, 419 tears as tactic of, 69, 70, 291-92
Beauty, 33-35 of Anti-Seducers, 131, 133, 138, Journal of Our Life in the Highlands
in courtly love, 36-37 142 (Queen Victoria), 84
dangers to, 40 of countries, 225 judgmentalism, 1 52, 404
effort required of, 33 flattery aimed at, 259 in Anti-Seducers, 133, 134
keys to, 36-39 insinuation, art of, 127, 211-18, 389, Julius Caesar (Shakespeare), 258-60
Madonna/whore as, 38 390 Jullian, Philippe, 22
missing qualities provided by, dropping hints in, 211, 216 Jung, Carl, 76
32-33, 34-35, 36, 39 gestures and looks in, 211, 217-18 Jungian archetypes, 36-37
noble qualities evoked by, 35-36, imagination and, 216 Jurgens, Ernest, 395-96
39 passing comments in, 211, 215, 216
patient attentiveness of, 38 pleasure provided by, 218 Kaus, Gina, 303
politicians as, 38-39, 40 in politics, 216-17 Keaton, Buster, 58
portrait painter as symbol of, 39 retraction with apology in, 211, Kennedy, John F., xxi, xxiv, 40, 51,
reputation of, 33, 37-38 215, 217 117, 123-26, 127, 128, 130,
Romantic, 31-33 reversal of, 218 224,329
self-sacrifice of, 36-38 seed as symbol of, 218 adventurousness of, 101, 102
subtle indications observed by, 33, slight physical contact in, 215 disarming weaknesses of, 290-91
36 slips of the tongue in, 217 insinuation used by, 217
ideals, lost, 39, 203, 208-10, 226, vagueness in, 216 isolation as technique of, 317
317 "Invitation to the Voyage" (Baude- lost ideals and, 39, 208-10, 317
Idol Worshipers, 158 laire), 314-1 5 missing qualities offered by, 174
Idylle Saphique (Pougy), 362 irrationality, 55, 378 mixed signals sent by, 193
Ihara Saikaku, 268, 421-22 isolation, creation of, 309—18 poeticizing of, 283
Iliad, The (Homer), 256-58 deceptive appearances and, 315 Key, Wilson Bryan, 289
illusions, creation of, 82, 295-307, exotic effect in, 311-13, 317 Kierkegaard, Søren, xxiv, 24, 31,
364 from family and friends, 316, 317, 169-70, 171, 172, 179-80, 181,
appearance of normality in, 304 318 182, 193, 201, 224, 246, 254,
changing the past in, 306 hint of danger in, 317 255-57, 279, 289-90, 291, 357,
dreams realized through, 303-4 on islands, 317 373, 387-88, 389
of gender, 297-300, 304 "only you" effect in, 313-15 King, Martin Luther, Jr., 113
reversal of, 307 from past attachments, 316-17 Kissinger, Henry A., 93, 183,
role playing in, 305 Pied Piper as symbol of, 318 374-75, 378
Shangri-La as symbol of, 307 by politicians, 317 knights, 36-37, 329-30, 331-32
uncanny effects in, 304 by religious sects, 317 Kolowrat, Count Sascha, 122
wish fulfillment in, 300-303 reversal of, 318 Kou Chien, King, 15, 311-13

[PAGE 490]
462 • Index
Kriegel, Maurice, 253 Louis XIV, King of France, 19, 35, religious mystics of, 366
Krishnamurti,Jiddu, 75-76, 109-10, 47, 49, 179-81, 282 troubadours of, xx, 36-37, 291,
358 Louis XV, King of France, 16, 33-35, 325,331
Kuang Hsu, Emperor, 267-69 36, 127, 216, 247, 249, 274, 435 Middleton-Murry,John, 206, 208
Kundera, Milan, 66 Louis XVIII, King of France, 426-27 Midgette, Allen, 72
Louÿs, Pierre, 371-74 Midsummer Night's Dream, A (Shake-
La Bruyere, Jean de, 49 Love Happy, 1 0 speare), 297
Laclos, Pierre Choderlos de, xix-xx, lovers' quarrels, 76 Milbanke, Annabella, 353
xxiv, 25, 169-71,287-89, Low, Ivy, 206, 208 Miller, Arthur, 12, 13
407-9, 418-20 Lucian, 420-21, 422 Ming Huang, Emperor, 76, 174, 270,
Ladd, Alan, 123 Lursay, Madame de (fict.), 138-40 272-73
Lake, Veronica, 128 miraculous prophets, charismatic,
Lamb, Lady Caroline, 351-52, 353, Machiavelli, Niccolò, 118 102-4
354 Madame Bovary (Flaubert), 364-65 mirroring, 45, 219-27, 279, 403,
Lamotte-Valois, Comtesse de, 305-6 Madonna/whore, 38 411, 412
Lancelot, Sir, 329-30, 386-87 makeup, xix, 8, 9, 10, 13, 434 by Charmers, 82
Lang, Fritz, 122 Making a Living, 58, 59 focused attention in, 226
language, seductive, xx, 153, 251-63, Malcolm X, 111, 112-14 of gender roles, 224-25
273 Malet, Elizabeth, 26 hunter's mirror as symbol of, 226
affirmation in, 261, 262 Malraux, Andre, 121 imitation in, 221-22, 223
ambiguity and vagueness in, 254, Mandel, Oscar, 23, 208, 232 indulgence in, 219, 223
258, 262, 263, 448 Mandrell, James, 200, 207 of lost ideals, 226
arguing vs., 260 Mann, Heinnch, 340-43 narcissism and, 224
boldness in, 262 Mansfield, Katherine, 206 by outsiders, 225
changes of perspective in, 261 Mao, Madame (Jiang Qing), 78, 173, reversal of, 227
of Charismatics, 99-100, 108, 111, 201, 249, 379,403, 412 of spiritual values, 225
114, 115-16 Mao Zedong, 77, 78, 88-89, 99, 118, in writing, 257
clouds as symbol of, 262 173, 201, 249, 403 missing qualities, 149, 207, 208-9
diabolic vs. symbolic, 262 Margaret of Navarre, Queen, xxi, and choice of victim, 171, 173-74
emotion vs. reason in, 260-61 326-31 Ideal Lovers and, 32-33, 34-35,
flattery in, 22, 85, 218, 233, 259, Marguerite de Valois, 14-15, 412 36, 39
376, 403 Marianne (Marivaux), 75, 292 mixed signals, 185-94, 223
flowery language vs., 263 Marie Antoinette, Queen of France, artificial vs. natural, 189-91
normal language vs., 258-59 305-6 cold vs. hot, 192-93; see also Co-
oratory, xx, 22-23, 24, 114, 115, Marivaux, Pierre, 69, 75, 292 quettes
235-36, 253-54, 258-60, 261, Mark Antony, xix, 8, 12, 13, 145, depth suggested by, 185, 192
275 159, 172,208,258-61,274, in first impressions, 191, 192-93
producing an effect with, 254, 259 283, 378, 392, 412 gender roles and, 192
promises in, 259, 260 Marx, Groucho, 10 gcod vs. bad, 187-89
of Rakes, 17, 19, 20, 22-24, 25 Mary, Queen of Scots, 346 imagination engaged by, 191
repetition in, 261-62 Masculine Dandies, 45-48 inner vs. outward qualities in,
reversal of, 263 masochism, 47, 71, 155, 237, 332, 192-93
self-absorption vs., 258 357, 378 paradox in, 190-91
silence vs., 263 mass seduction, see Charismatics; in politics, 193
in soft sell, 445 politicians; soft sell reputation and, 193
strong emotions roused by, 261 Maurois, Andre, 83 reversal of, 194
see also writing Maxwell, Elsa, 313, 314 theater curtain as symbol of, 194
Lauzun, Antonin Péguilin, Duke de, Mayer, J. P., 125 Mohammed Riza Pahlavi, Shah of
xx, 75, 179-81, 201, 282 Memoirs from Beyond the Grave Iran, 313, 375
Lawner, Lynne, 13, 299-300 (Chateaubriand), 337, 345 Molière, 22, 207-8, 258
Lawrence, D. H., 205-7, 208, 209, Menken, Adah Isaacs, 100 Molina, Tirso de, 19-20, 232
210, 400, 423-25 mental superiority, sense of, 155-56 moment, the, 423, 435
Leadbeater, Charles, 109 Merteuil, Marquise de (fict.), 418-20 abandonment to, 21, 25
Le Gallienne, Richard, 191 Mesmer, Franz, 434—35 leading into, 393, 400, 402-4
Lemaître, Jules, 49 Messalina, 136-37 Mona Lisa (da Vinci), 188
Lenin, V. I., 98, 99, 101, 107-9, 183, Metamorphoses (Ovid), 43-45, 71-74, Mondale, Walter, 450
201-2 121-23, 180-81, 182-83 Monneyron, Frédéric, 181-82
Leonardo da Vinci, 188 Metternich, Prince Klemens von, Monroe, Marilyn, xxiv, 9-11, 12, 13,
Lesbos, island of, 317, 362-63 188, 343 14, 16, 101, 125, 130, 192, 274,
Lewis, Arthur H., 395-96, 398 Michels, Roberto, 77 291, 338
Lincoln, Abraham, 99 Middle Ages, 103, 328 Monsieur Beaucaire, 44
Lonely Leaders, 159 courtly love in, 36-37, 325-26, Montez, Lola, 173, 199-200, 357
lost ideals, 39, 203, 208-10, 226, 317 331 Montpensier, Anne Marie Louise

[PAGE 491]
Index • 463
d'Orleans, Duchess de, 179-81, Nicholas II, Czar of Russia, 105, timing of, 379
201, 282 107, 201 Pampered Royals, 151, 421
mood changes, xix, 7-8, 9, 11, 249, Nietzsche, Friedrich, xxii, xxiii, 36 Paris, xix, 13
312, 418-19 Andreas-Salomé and, 45-46, 47, Judgment of, 9-11
moralizers, anti-seductive, 134, 143-44 52, 197-98, 199, 227 Pasionaria, La (Dolores Gómez Ibar-
Morin, Edgar, 121, 124-25 Ninon de l'Enclos, xx, 75, 183, 192, ruri), 99-100
Morosini, Countess, 328 217, 223, 224-25, 293, 409, Patience (Gilbert and Sullivan), 189
Moscovici, Serge, 83, 199, 221-22 417, 425-26 Pawnbroker, The, 58
Moses, 98, 113, 114 Niou, Prince (fict.), 25 Pearl, Cora, 59-61, 66, 291
Much Ado About Nothing (Shake- Nisan, 37 Pearson, Hesketh, 189-90
speare), 183 Nixon, Richard M., 123-24, 374, Perón, Evita, 110-12
Murasaki Shikibu, xxiv, 25, 61, 375 poeticizing of, 279-81, 283-84
63-65, 140-41, 269-71, 287 "No Tomorrow" (Denon), 213-15 Perón, Juan, 111, 279-81
Musil, Robert, 227 Novices, 153 persuasion, xx-xxi, 215-16, 317
Musset, Alfred de, 40, 281 argument vs. humor in, 260
Mussolini, Benito, 102, 275 Octavia, 8 emotion vs. reason in, 260-61, 444
Mut, Professor (fict.), 340-43 Octavius, 8, 16, 145, 378 Peter I "the Great," Czar of Russia, 99
Mythic Stars, 123-26 Odyssey, The (Homer), 7-8, 11, 12-13 Peter III, Czar of Russia, 37, 90, 201,
oedipal regression, 333, 337, 340-43 225, 300
Napoleon I, Emperor of France, xx, Olympian actors, charismatic, 114-16 Petronius, 50, 201
14, 99, 187, 200, 261, 298, 326 Onassis, Aristotle, 313 Philip III, King of Spain, 234-35
calculated surprise by, 243 On Love (Stendhal), 58, 170, 280-82, physical lures, 393-404
as Charismatic, 101, 102, 111 284, 375-77 devil-may-care attitude and, 404
Coquette played by, 77 opinion, influencing, xx-xxi disordered look in, 402-3
French re-seduced by, 426-28 oratory, seductive, xx, 22-23, 24, flattery and, 403
insinuation used by, 216-17 114, 115, 235-36, 253-54, focused attention and, 401-2
Josephine and, 13, 69-71, 74, 78, 258-60, 261, 275 heated glances in, 396, 397, 402,
154, 217, 291-92, 390, 412 Orléans, Duchess d', 21 403
missing qualities offered by, 1 74 Orléans, Duke d', 19-20 as leading into the moment, 393,
Talleyrand and, 38-39 Orlov, Gregory, 90 400, 402-4
temptations created by, 235-36 Orsay, Count d', 49 lowering inhibitions by, 393,
Napoleon III (Louis-Napoleon), Em- Ortega y Gasset, Jose, xxii, 282-83 397-401
peror of France, 339-40 Otero, Caroline "La Belle," 194, 398, mental activity lulled by, 393,
narcissism, 41, 45, 50, 82, 157, 219 402, 412 400-401, 402, 403
of Coquettes, 67, 73, 74, 75, 76, heat projected by, 395-97 physical excitation aroused by, 399,
77 Overstreet, H. A., 60 400, 402, 403
mirroring and, 224 Ovid, xx, xxii, xxiv, 9, 43-45, projected heat in, 393, 395-97
Narcissus, 71-74 71-74, 81-82, 121-23, 135-36, raft as symbol of, 404
natural phenomena, 55 172, 179, 180-81, 182-83, 221, reversal of, 404
Naturals, 3, 53-66 253-54, 255, 279-80, 323, 331, sensual appeal of, 402
dangers to, 66 352, 371-72, 397, 408-9, shared physical activity in, 398,
disarming weakness of, 53, 56, 59 418-19, 423-24 400, 403
examples of, 58-65 slight physical contacts in, 395,
fantasy world created by, 63 Pahlavi, Mohammed Riza, Shah of 396, 397, 400, 403
imps, 56-57, 59-61, 66 Iran, 313, 375 Picasso, Pablo, 25, 26, 45, 100, 379
independence in, 61 pain, mixing pleasure with, 155, 159, art as lure of, 366
innocents, 54, 58-59, 66 237, 369-79, 389, 391, 410, poeticizing of, 283
lamb as symbol of, 65 415, 418, 424-25 Picón, Jacinto Octavio, 231-34
naivete of, 58-59 anxiety induced by, 376-77, 378 Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, The,
as potentially irritating, 66 bracing effect of, 377 31-32,50,65,263
psychological traits of, 55-57 breakups in, 369, 378 Plato, 74-76, 191, 206-7, 208
receptiveness of, 57 calculated absences in, 372, Plutarch, 8, 46-47, 261
spoiled children as, 61 373-74 poeticizing oneself, 277-84
sympathy elicited by, 53, 56, 59, 66 emotional highs and lows in, bit of doubt in, 282-83
undefensive lovers, 57, 63-65 371-74 calculated absences in, 277,
wonder children, 57, 61-63 fear in, 369, 377-78, 379 283-84
youth and, 66 guilt in, 369 familiarity vs., 277, 281, 282, 284
neediness, 59, 74, 75, 87, 134, 293 harshness and kindness in, 374-76 halo as symbol of, 284
Nelson, Viscount Horatio, 304 jealousy in, 372, 373, 374, 377 idealizing one's targets in, 284
Nero, Emperor of Rome, 50 masochistic yearnings for, 47, 71, objects in, 283
New Prudes, 151-52 155, 237, 332, 357, 378 reversal of, 284
New York Times, 189, 396 precipice as symbol of, 379 self-image and, 281-82
Nicholas, Grand Duke, 396 reversal of, 379 shared experiences in, 283

[PAGE 492]
464 • Index
politicians, xx-xxi, 101, 183, 366, Aesthetic, 423 of Rakes, 20-21, 26-27, 28,
374-76 Ardent, 19-21 200-201
anxiety and discontent induced by, convention defied by, 26, 27 Rescuers, 157
209-10 cruelty of, 26 re-seduction, 415-29, 435
as Charmers, 81, 82, 83-85, 87, dangerousness of, 17, 24, 25, 26, calculated surprises in, 420-21
88-92, 93 27 embers as symbol of, 428
as Coquettes, 77 dangers to, 28 fight against inertia in, 417-18
as Dandies, 51 Demonic, 21-24 intermittent drama in, 423-25
disarming weaknesses of, 292 derivation of term, 25 maintaining lightness in, 418, 421,
as Ideal Lovers, 38-39, 40 erotic vs. political, 24 423
insinuation used by, 216-17 extremism of, 26 maintaining mystery in, 418
isolation created by, 317 as female fantasy figure, 17, 20-21, political, 426-28
mixed signals sent by, 193 23, 24-25, 26 reversal of, 429
re-seduction by, 426-28 fire as symbol of, 27 timing of, 428
soft sell by, 446-48, 450-52 keys to, 24-27 resistance, xxiii, xxiv, 25, 154, 164,
triangles created by, 201-2 masculine envy engendered by, 28 172, 177, 181, 183, 188, 215,
victims chosen by, 174 mirroring by, 225-26 216, 236, 289, 376, 400, 412,
war heroes as, 329, 446-48 obstacles overcome by, 21, 25, 449
see also Charismatics; oratory, se- 225-26 and proving oneself, 321, 323, 324
ductive pleasure offered by, 24, 25, 27 to temptations, 236
Pompadour, Jeanne Poisson, Madame reformation of, 26, 225, 353, 354 reverse parental regression, 333, 338,
de, 16,33-35,36, 127,249, Reformed, as victims, 1 50 346-48
274, 435 reputation of, 20-21, 26-27, 28, Richardson, Samuel, 225, 315-16
pop art, 71-72, 73 200-201 Richelieu, Duke de, 19-21, 25, 27,
Portsmouth, Louise Keroualle, seductive language of, 17, 19, 20, 170, 200, 247, 356, 410
Duchess of, 420 22-24, 25 Richthofen, Baroness Frieda von,
post-seduction, see disenchantment; voices of, 22-23 206, 423-25
re-seduction Rank, Otto, 76 Rilke, Rainer Maria, 46-47, 227
Potemkin, Prince Gregory, 274, Rasputin, Grigori Efimovich, Ring of the Dove, The: A Treatise on the
300-303 100-102, 104-5 Art and Practice of Arab Love (Ibn
Pougy, Liane de, 361-62, 363, 364 physical lures of, 403 Hazm), 126, 183-84, 409
Presley, Elvis, 28, 44, 50, 105-6, 107 spiritual lures of, 366, 403 Robespierre, Maximilien de, 116-17,
pride, excessive, 142 reactors, anti-seductive, 135 118
Private Life of the Marshal Duke of Reagan, Ronald, 202 Rochester, Earl of, 26
Richelieu, The, 20-21 soft sell of, 450-52 Rohan, Cardinal de, 305-6
Professors, 1 55-56 Récamier, Madame, 187-89, 192, Romantic Ideal, 31-33
prostitutes, 40, 354, 356 217,237,343-46 Romanticism, 226, 343
Proust, Marcel, 70, 283 Rée, Paul, 45-46, 197-98, 199 Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 86,
proving oneself, 25, 321-32, 417, 425 Reformed Rakes or Sirens, 150 98-99, 100, 102, 118
apparent suicide in, 324-25 regression, erotic, 333-48 seductive oratory of, 260
doubts allayed by, 321, 323, 324 bed as symbol of, 348 Rothschild, Baron Elie de, 273
improvisation in, 324—25 ego ideal, 337-38, 343-46 Roués, 157-58
passing tests in, 326—31 infantile, 336-37, 338-40
persistence in, 324-25 oedipal, 333, 337, 340-43 Sabatier, Apollonie, 385-88
rescue in, 329-30 rebellion in, 348 Sacher-Masoch, Leopold von, 372,
resistance and, 321, 323, 324 reversal of, 348 373-74
reversal of, 332 reverse parental, 333, 338, 346-48 Sackville-West, Vita, 102
risking death in, 327-29 therapist role in, 336, 345-46 sadness, air of, 69, 76, 157, 172, 192,
self-sacrifice in, 326-27, 425 transference in, 335—36 292, 364-65
tournament as symbol of, 332 unconditional love in, 336-37, 340 Saint-Amand, Imbert de, 69
unhesitating action in, 329-30 Reichenbach, Harry, 452-54 Sainte-Beuve, Charles Augustin,
by war heroes, 327-29 Reik, Theodor, 209-10, 336-37, 338-39
prudery, 151-52 388-90 Saint-Germain, Count, 127-28, 216,
Ptolemy XIV, Pharaoh, 7 reliability, 243 244
Pygmalion, 121-23 Remarque, Erich Maria, 121 Salomé, Lou von, see Andreas-
Pygmalion complex, 173 Remembrance of Things Past (Proust), Salomé, Lou
283 Saltykov, Sergei, 37-38, 225-26
Quicksand (Tanazaki), 356 Renaissance, 12, 38, 356 Sand, George, 40, 49
reputation, 46, 193, 223, 314, 379 Sappho, 317, 362-63
rakehells, 25 in creation of triangles, 195, Satan, androgyny of, 51
Rakes, 3, 17-28, 49, 130, 152, 247, 200-201 Satyricon (Petronius), 50, 201
315-16 of Ideal Lovers, 33, 37-38 saviors, charismatic, 107-9
as abandoned to moment, 21, 25 mixed signals and, 193 Savonarola, Girolamo, 101

[PAGE 493]
Index • 465
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 84 adornment of, xix, 7, 8, 13, Stars, 3, 119-30, 153
Sedgwick, Edie, 72 14-15, 24, 274 cinematic creation of, 124-25, 127
seducers, xix-xxv appearance of, 8, 9-10, 13, 23 dangers to, 130
amorality of, xxiii-xxiv, 21, 47 dangerousness of, 5, 1 1, 12-13 distinctive style of, 119, 122, 123,
appearance of, xix, xx, xxii dangers to, 1 6 125, 127, 128
consistency of, xxii differentiation of, 12 dreamlike quality of, 1 1 9, 126,
falling in love with, xix, xxi, xxii keys to, 11-15 127, 128
male, xx as male fantasy figure, xx, 5,9, 11, ethereality of, 119, 126-27
other-directedness of, xxii-xxiii 12 face of, 122, 123, 127, 128
as providers of pleasure, xxiii men enslaved by, xix, 8, 12 Fetishistic, 121-23
resistance to, xxiii, xxiv mood changes of, xix, 7-8, 9, 1 1 glimpsed private life of, 128
seductive language of, xx movement and demeanor of, 5, 10, identification with, 128-29
sexual element utilized by, xxii 15 idol as symbol of, 129
strategic planning of, xx, xxii, xxiii in Odyssey, 7-8, 11, 12-13 inner distance of, 123, 125, 129
subtle methods of, xxi pleasure offered by, 11 keys to, 126-29
surrender to will of, xxi, xxii, xxiv Reformed, as victims, 150 Mythic, 123-26
theatricality of, xx, xxiii Sex, 9-11 as objects, 122, 127-28
warrior's outlook of, xxii Spectacular, 7-9 obsessive attention to, 121, 122,
Seducer's Diary, The (Kierkegaard), theatricality of, 7, 8, 9 126, 130
xxiv, 31, 127, 169-70, 172, voices of, 7, 9, 10, 13-14 publicity and, 130
179-80, 182, 193, 201, 224, water as symbol of, 15 self-distance of, 122, 130
254, 255-57, 279, 289-90, 357, Slater, Leonard, 313 television and, 123-24, 125
373, 387-88, 389 Socrates, 74-76, 191-92, 206-7, 208 Stendhal, 58, 170, 200, 217, 280-82,
seduction, derivation of term, xxi soft sell, 441-54 284, 304, 371, 375-77
Seduction (Baudrillard), xxiii, 9, components of, 444-46 Stewart, Jimmy, 125, 129
127-28, 288, 385 examples of, 446-54 "Story of the Butterfly, The," 298, 299
Sei Shonagon, 31-32, 50, 65, 263 hard sell vs., 443 suffocators, anti-seductive, 134
selective disclosure, 14-15, 237 origin of, 443 Sukarno, Kusnasosro, 102, 221-23
self-absorption, 87, 163, 173, 363, 410 Solanas, Valerie, 78 Sukarno: An Autobiography as Told to
of Anti-Seducers, 131, 133, 137, Sons and Lovers (Lawrence), 206 Cindy Adams (Adams), 222
138, 140 Spanish Civil War, 99-100 Sun-tzu, 315
seductive language vs., 258 spectacles, 265, 267-69, 275, 301, Su Shou, 291
self-awareness, 100, 131 447 suspense, creation of, see calculated
self-consciousness, 135, 138-40, 354, Spectacular Sirens, 7-9 surprises
359, 363 spirituality, 158 suspicion, 289, 290, 441
self-distance, 122, 130 aura of, 38, 98, 358 sympathy, 53, 56, 59, 66, 285, 292,
self-esteem, 75, 79, 81, 158, 200, mirroring of, 225 293
208, 210, 224, 227, 282 spiritual lures, 359-67, 403, 404 Symposium, The (Plato), 74-76, 191,
self-image, 281-82 air of discontent in, 359, 364-65 206-7, 208
self-loathing, 154, 362, 363 artistic, 359, 361-62, 365-66
self-sabotage, 378 cultic rituals as, 362-63 taboos, transgression of, 349-58
self-sacrifice, 36-38, 82, 326-27, 425 ennoblement by, 365, 366 cruelty in, 349, 352, 353, 356-57
self-sufficiency, 67, 71, 73, 74-75, in environment, 434—35 forest as symbol of, 358
76, 77 lightness induced by, 363 going to extremes in, 349, 355,
Seneca, 50 occult fads in, 359, 365 358
Sennett, Mack, 58 pagan, 362-63, 365 incest in, 352-53
Sensualists, 159 religion in, 359, 363-64 lost self recaptured by, 35 1-54
Sex Sirens, 9-11 reversal of, 367 prohibited desires in, 352-53,
Shahrazad, 245-47 sense of destiny in, 177, 359, 365 354-55
Shakespeare, William, 50, 107, 183, sexual undertones of, 359, 363-64, reduced outlets for, 354
258-60, 267-68, 314, 316, 418 366 reversal of, 358
Shaw, George Bernard, 126 stars in the sky as symbol of, 367 secret sins in, 351, 352
Sheik, The, 43-44 timeless relationship suggested by, sense of guilt in, 349, 355, 357
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 353 364, 365-66, 367 shared complicity in, 349, 352, 357
Shi Pei Pu, 173-74, 297-300, 304 timing and, 365 social limits in, 349, 353-55, 357,
Shoulder Anns, 58 worshipful feelings engendered by, 358
Shu-Chiung, 270 361-64 value systems in, 349, 356
Sibony, Daniel, 351 spoiled children, 61, 151, 348 Tabouis, G. R., 399-401
Sieburg, Friedrich, 337 spontaneity, sense of, 241 Tale of Genji, The (Murasaki), xxiv,
Silenus, 56, 191 Staël, Madame de, 187-88, 343, 344 25, 61, 63-65, 140-41, 172,
Simone, 23 Stahl, Lesley, 450-51 269-71, 287
Sirens, xix, 3, 5-16, 26, 28, 152, 155, Stalin, Joseph, 88-89, 108 Tales from the Thousand and One
184 Starkie, Walter, 22-23 Nights, 222-26, 244-47

[PAGE 494]
466 • Index
Talleyrand-Périgord, Prince Charles contrasts in, 201-2 evaluating responses in, 171-72
de, 38-39 jealousy engendered by, 197-98 exciting tension in, 171, 173
Tanazaki, Junichiro, 356 by politicians, 201-2 imagination and, 172
Tantalus, 231 reputation in, 195, 200-201 leisure time in, 173
Tantrism, 410 reversal of, 202 manly men as, 12, 172
Tarde, Gustave, 83 rivalry stimulated by, 200 missing qualities and, 171, 173-74
Tausk, Victor, 198, 199 trophy as symbol of, 202 new types as, 170, 172
tayus, 436 vanity and, 200, 201 one's own type as, 149
tears, 69, 70, 76, 78, 285, 291-92, Tristan and Isolde, 12, 190-92, personal reactions in, 167, 170,
311, 373 354-55, 357 171, 172, 290, 397
television, 114, 115, 123-24, 125, troubadours, xx, 36-37, 291, 325, in politics, 174
450-51 331 repressed types as, 173-74
temptations, creation of, 229-38, 425 Trouncer, Margaret, 187-88 reversal of, 175
apple in Garden of Eden as symbol Truman, Harry S., 99, 118, 123, 124, unhappiness and, 167, 172
of, 237 128 vulnerability in, 170-71
barriers established in, 233-34, 236 Tsao Hsueh Chin, 270-72 victim strategy, 287-89, 292
challenges in, 236-37 Tsu Hsi, Empress Dowager, 267-69 Victoria, Queen of England, 51,
deceptive appearances and, 234 Tullia d'Aragona, 12, 38, 40, 173, 83-85, 143, 145, 210, 236,
forbidden fruit in, 231-34, 237, 182, 330-32 274-75, 284
244 Tuperselai, 397-98 Vietnam War, 374-75
future gains in, 235-36 Villarceaux, Marquis de, 425-26
opportunity in, 237 ukiyo ("floating world"), 435-37 Virgin of Stamboul, The, 452-53
reversal of, 238 ulterior motives, 21, 142-43 Viscontini, Countess Metilda, 377
selective disclosure in, 14-15, 237 unattainability, apparent, 192, 201, Vivien, Renée, 317, 362-63
weakness as target in, 229, 234-37 321 voices, 22-23, 34, 115, 259, 261,
That Obscure Object of Desire, 373 "Uncanny, The" (Freud), 301-2 268, 297, 351, 395
theatricality, xx, xxiii, 267-69, unconditional love, 336-37, 340 of Sirens, 7, 9, 10, 13-14
421-23 undefensive lovers, 57, 63-65 Voltaire, 34
of bold movers, 411-12 von Sternberg, Josef, 121-22, 373
of Charismatics, 100 Valentino, Rudolph, 43-44, 52, vulgarians, anti-seductive, 135-36
of environment, 431, 433-34, 436, 356-57
439 patient attentiveness of, 38, 43, 44, Wadler, Joyce, 297
of Sirens, 7, 8, 9 50, 273-74 Wagner, Richard, 100
spectacles in, 265, 267-69, 275, Valmont, Vicomte de (fict.), 25, war heroes, 327-29, 446-48
301, 447 169-71, 287-89, 290, 407-9, Warhol, Andy, 33-34, 49, 52, 71-73,
Theosophical Society, 109 412 78, 126, 128, 192
third parties, 273 Valois, Mademoiselle de, 19-20 calculated surprise by, 248
in indirect approach, 177, 183 Vanderbilt, William, 396 Factory as environment of, 437-38
see also jealousy; triangles, creation vanity, 71, 74, 79, 81, 135, 171, 195, triangles created by, 200
of 199, 200, 210, 226, 235, 259, Washington, George, 99
Thus Spake Zarathustra (Nietzsche), 46 314, 408-9, 426 Wayne, John, 51, 125
Tiberius, Emperor of Rome, 317 victims, 147-60 Wayward Head and Head, The (Crébil-
tightwads, anti-seductive, 134-35 Aging Babies, 156-57 lon fils), 138-40, 402
time, altered sense of, 431-39 Beauties, 156 weaknesses, disarming, 285-93
Casanova's creation of, 435, Conquerors, 153-54 blemish as symbol of, 292
438-39 Crushed Stars, 152-53 gender differences in, 291
timidity, 410, 426 Disappointed Dreamers, 150-51 genuine, 290
timing: Drama Queens, 155 "honest" confessions of, 284, 285,
of Charmers, 90-91, 92, 93 Exotic Fetishists, 154-55 287-88, 289
of Coquettes, 78 Floating Genders, 160 of Naturals, 53, 56, 59
dramatic moments in, 435 Idol Worshipers, 158 occasional glimpses of, 290, 291
of pain mixed with pleasure, 379 Lonely Leaders, 159 pathetic vs., 290, 293
of re-seduction, 428 New Prudes, 151-52 in playing the victim, 285, 287-89,
speed and youth in, 435 Novices, 153 292
spiritual lures and, 365 Pampered Royals, 151 of politicians, 292
Tito, Josef, 77 Professors, 155-56 reversal of, 293
Todellas, Don Juan de (fict.), 231-34 Reformed Rakes or Sirens, 150 shyness as, 285, 290, 291
Tragedy of King Richard III, The Rescuers, 157 suspicion reduced by, 289, 290
(Shakespeare), 314, 316 Roués, 157-58 sympathy evoked by, 285, 292, 293
transference, 335-36 Sensualists, 159 tears as, 285, 291-92
triangles, creation of, 195-202 victims, choice of, 12, 40, 167-75 of troubadours, 291
aura of desirability from, 195, big game as symbol of, 174 Weber, Max, 97-98, 106
199-201, 202 deceptive appearances and, 173 Webster, Lady Frances, 352, 357

[PAGE 495]
Index • 467
Wedekind, Franz, 46 doubts created by, 383, 389, 390 wonder children, 57, 61-63
Weekley, Ernest, 423-24 infantile experiences re-created by, Woolf, Virginia, 34
Welles, Orson, 313, 314 388-91 World War I, 22-23, 58, 59, 107,
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke interest in another person as, 383, 327-29, 396
of, 188, 343-44 387, 390, 392, 419; see also tri- World War II, 86, 100, 114, 115,
Welter, Blanca Rosa, see Christian, angles, creation of 217,253, 328
Linda letter-writing in, 385-86, 387, writing, 251, 254, 255-58, 288
Whitmer, Peter, 107 388, 389 guidelines for, 257-58
Wilde, Oscar, 49, 188, 189-90, 192, pomegranate as symbol of, 391 mirroring in, 257
193, 234 reversal of, 392 in strategic withdrawal, 385—86,
Williams, Tennessee, 72 role reversal engendered by, 391 387, 388, 389
Wilson, Harriette, 48-49 selective, by Coquettes, 67, 70-71,
windbags, anti-seductive, 135, 145 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 390 Yang Kuei-Fei, 76, 174, 270, 272-73,
withdrawal, strategic, 383-90, 418, sexless neutrality in, 389-90 274
424 subtlety in, 389
aggressive pursuit motivated by, see also calculated absences Zeus (Jupiter), xxiii, 9, 57, 58,
387, 389, 390 Woman and Puppet (Louÿs), 182-83, 256-58, 287-88
anxiety induced by, 388-89, 390, 391 371-74 Zhou Enlai, 88-90, 93

[PAGE 496]
In every corner of the world, on every subject under the sun, Penguin represents
quality and variety—the very best in publishing today.
For complete information about books available from Penguin—including
Penguin Classics, Penguin Compass, and Puffins—and how to order them, write
to us at the appropriate address below. Please note that for copyright reasons the
selection of books varies from country to country.
In the United States: Please write to Penguin Group (USA), P.O. Box 12289
Dept. B, Newark, New Jersey 07101-5289 or call 1-800-788-6262.
In the United Kingdom: Please write to Dept. EP, Penguin Books Ltd, Bath
Road, Harmondsworth, West Drayton, Middlesex UB7 0DA.
In Canada: Please write to Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Suite
300,Toronto, Ontario M4V 3B2.
In Australia: Please write to Penguin Books Australia Ltd, P.O. Box 257,
Ringwood, Victoria 3134.
In New Zealand: Please write to Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Private Bag 102902,
North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland 10.
In India: Please write to Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Panchsheel Shopping
Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi 110 017.
In the Netherlands: Please write to Penguin Books Netherlands bv, Postbus 3507,
NL-1001 AH Amsterdam.
In Germany: Please write to Penguin Books Deutschland GmbH, Metzlerstrasse
26, 60594 Frankfurt am Main.
In Spain: Please write to Penguin Books S. A., Bravo Murillo 19, 1° B, 28015
Madrid.
In Italy: Please write to Penguin Italia s.r.l., Via Benedetto Croce 2, 20094 Corsico,
Milano.
In France: Please write to Penguin France, Le Carré Wilson, 62 rue Benjamin
Baillaud, 31500 Toulouse.
In Japan: Please write to Penguin Books Japan Ltd, Kaneko Building, 2-3-25
Koraku, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo 112.
In South Africa: Please write to Penguin Books South Africa (Pty) Ltd, Private Bag
X14, Parkview, 2122 Johannesburg.